 Story_ID: 378961 Speaker 1: So, good morning. I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers, the interviewer. This is Neculai Burghelea the videographer, producer, makeup artist. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And I will just have you slate for the cameras, state your full name and spell it out for me? Speaker 2: Full name Shari Lynette Carpenter [HistoryMaker Shari Carpenter]. Spell all of it? Speaker 1: Yes, please, so that we have the spelling correct. Speaker 2: Okay, Shari, S-H-A-R-I, Lynette, L-Y-N-E-T-T-E, Carpenter, C-A-R-P-E-N-T-E-R. Speaker 1: Today's--actually, your date of birth? Speaker 2: My date of birth, July 14, 1961. Speaker 1: Place of birth? Speaker 2: Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: Today's date? Speaker 2: January 31st, 2007 (laughter). Speaker 1: The location of this interview? Speaker 2: Where are we? Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP]? Speaker 1: Well, just, yeah, so, basically Times Square in New York City [New York, New York] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, Times Square, New York City. Story_ID: 378962 Speaker 1: So, I'm gonna ask you five basic People magazine type questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Your favorite color? Speaker 2: Orange. Speaker 1: Favorite food? Speaker 2: French fries. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: That I've been to already or that I wanna go to? Speaker 1: Either one? Speaker 2: I've always had this desire to go to Greece. Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Oh, my sister [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter] warned me about this. My favorite, one of my favorites, a man's reach should exceed--no, a man's grasp should exceed his reach, or a man's reach should exceed his grasp. I don't remember which way it goes now. Speaker 1: That's a good one. Speaker 2: I like that too, yeah. Story_ID: 378963 Speaker 1: I know we talked a lot about this with your sister, Patti [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter], so we won't cover it as intensely as we did with her. Speaker 2: Good. Speaker 1: But I will try to have you maybe, possibly tell it, some of the, your early memories of your childhood from your own point of view. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So, just for your record, I will have you state your mother's name, your mother's place of birth, and date of birth? Speaker 2: Okay. My mom's name, Vivian Constance Tyler Carpenter [Vivian Tyler Carpenter]. Her date of birth, July 24th, 1932, she was born in Suffolk, Virginia. Speaker 1: And do you have any, did she tell you possibly any stories about her childhood growing up in Virginia that Patti may not have known or-- Speaker 2: Probably not, Pat is a better keeper of the history than I am because I'm the baby. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I guess I kind of feel like I don't have to keep (laughter) any of that 'cause other people have already done it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, she's doing it. Right. Right. Well, just let me ask you this. What are some of the memories you have of your mother, from your own point of view, being the baby of the family? Speaker 2: I remember pictures when I was growing up. She was a member of this organization called, I think, The Minks [sic. The Links, Incorporated]. And there was this group of fabulous black women and they always had all these great parties and they were always very dressed up. I remember pictures of that and sometimes I guess they would come over and play cards in the basement, and I would sit on the steps and listen to them and they would dance, she and my, my father [Horace Carpenter] would dance a lot. I remember that. She used to smoke, I used to harass her terribly for smoking (laughter), I remember that very well. Speaker 1: What was her brand? Speaker 2: That I don't know but she smoked a lot. And I used to tell her she was gonna die, her lungs were gonna turn black, and now she's so anti-smoking it's amazing to me. She smoked for a really long time but I guess that's what you did back then, you know. You didn't know what you know now. Speaker 1: How far is her hometown from D.C. [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Couple hours, two, three hours (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Couple of hours. Okay. So, she grew up--she spent most of that time in the South, in Virginia? Speaker 2: She spent a lot of time in the--this is where it gets a little confusing to me. She spent a lot of time in the South but she met my dad when she was about twelve. She met my dad's brother [William Carpenter, Jr.] and his brother's wife, they all were a little group at a very young age and then just stayed together for the rest of her life. She came to D.C. I guess to go to school, I think. Speaker 1: Where did she go to school? Speaker 2: For some reason I feel like there's this place called Mrs. Potter's Boarding School [ph.] (laughter) or something like that. I could be totally making this up (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I know. There's, there's a Potter's. Speaker 2: Okay, that may be where it is. She didn't--what I do know, she was not raised by her parents [Coteha Crocker Tyler and Milton Tyler]. I don't think she knows her father very well at all. Her mom died when she was sixteen. She was raised by two aunts, Aunt Jessie [Jessie Hollis Crocker (ph.)] and Aunt Bessie [Bessie Baleise Crocker (ph.)]. So, I don't know--my mom doesn't know a whole, whole lot, I don't think, about her family and I know even less because her father wasn't around and her mom died, you know, very young. Same thing with my father, he doesn't--his parents [Eldora Jentons Carpenter and William Carpenter, Sr.] died when he was very young as well. Speaker 1: But were there any stories about legends in the family that may have been passed down that you know of, like oh, there's this great uncle, cousin, who did such and such? Speaker 2: I think it was probably more about the two aunts that raised her. They both owned their own property, they both were professional women. One was a teacher and I believe the other one was a nurse, they were very proud people. They instilled, I guess, these good middle-class values in my mom, so those kinds of stories. But the fact that they were women I guess was--the women on my mom's side of the family are very strong and very prominent, whereas I think on my dad's side maybe the men are a little more in the forefront (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Prominent than the women. Now where did the two aunts go to school, and what are their names? Speaker 2: Aunt Jessie. Speaker 1: Aunt Jessie. Speaker 2: And Aunt Bessie. Speaker 1: Aunt Bessie, so Jessie and Bessie. Were they twins? Speaker 2: No, sisters but not twins (laughter). I do not know where they went to school. See, this is why Pat's good, I'm glad you probably got (laughter) some of this from Pat 'cause I don't know. And they didn't give me enough time to actually, you know, call my mom and say, mom, tell me what I need to know. Speaker 1: So, are there any other stories that you can share about your mom, her personality, some of the traits she may have passed on to you? Speaker 2: Traits that I found out later in life that she passed on to me, my mom always wanted to be a writer which I didn't know until I was a teenager and maybe later. And I'm a writer, so I think I got that from her. She's very strong, fairly quiet but very steadfast. Other things about my mom. I'm trying to think, those are the two things that come to mind. But the writing thing really kind of--'cause my father is a visual artist and Pat is a visual artist and so I always knew their connection but I didn't realize that if my mom had her way which she would have really loved to do is be a writer. Years ago, well, ten years ago--ten, twelve years ago I asked her to tell--give me a word to describe her when she was young and she said, "I was vivacious." Speaker 1: Would you use that same word to describe yourself? Speaker 2: No, (laughter) no. Story_ID: 378964 Speaker 1: So let's talk about your father and your father's side of the family. Your father's name? Speaker 2: My father's name is Horace Jentons Carpenter [Horace Carpenter]. He was born in Madison, Virginia, February 7th, 1934. His mom was Eldora [Eldora Jentons Carpenter], his dad was Milton [sic. William Carpenter, Sr.]. His dad died when he was seven, mom died when he was two. He was raised by an aunt, his Aunt Norval [Norval Jentons]. He has a brother who's since passed, William [William Carpenter, Jr.], sister Norville [Norville Carpenter], also Norville. He spent a lot of time in New York [New York]. I don't know when he came here but he spent a lot of time in New York, and I did too as a kid because of him. Speaker 1: But you said he was a visual artist? Speaker 2: He's a--yeah. Speaker 1: How would you describe his work then? Speaker 2: I guess he's what would be considered a fine artist. I remember three pieces of art that he had in the house when I was growing up, one of them I actually have in my bedroom now. One was a charcoal drawing of Thelonious Monk who actually until very recently I didn't know was Thelonious Monk because (laughter) the picture looks very much like my uncle. I thought it was his brother. He had this collage that he had done. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: One second Neculai [Neculai Burghelea] just--okay, continuing the picture looks like Thelonious Monk--I mean looks like your uncle but it (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It looked like my Uncle William but it was actually Thelonious Monk. He had a collage that he had done that was of a hand and the hand was made out of pages from the Bible. And then there was this huge piece that was in the living room that was a chalk drawing of a matador up on his toes in the throes of stabbing a bull. So, he was--those are the pieces that were in the house all the time that I remember seeing every day when I was growing up. And I guess-- Speaker 2: So what happened to his work, what happened to those pieces? Speaker 1: When they moved from the house in Washington [D.C.], which is where I was born and--I think they probably went into storage. I kept the piece that was--the Thelonious piece I got, so that's at my house and the other two pieces are in storage. He doesn't seem to have the same attachment to them now as he did I guess when he was younger or when we were in the house (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Younger, yeah. When he was creating them? Speaker 1: Yeah. Like when I told my sister [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter] I was gonna ask--they told us they were moving from the house and I said to my sister, "I'm gonna ask dad for one of his pieces of art." And she was like, "Oh, he's not gonna give it to you." And I said, "Dad, can I have the, the orange piece in the living room?" And he was like, "Yeah, sure." I think he was, he was, he was happy that I asked. I guess he didn't necessary know that we placed any value on it but I certainly did. Speaker 2: Did your dad talk about his childhood, any stories you remember or any traits that you--that he passed on to you, that looking back you can say, oh, I got that from my dad? Speaker 1: I think my artistic ability is from my mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] but my ability or my desire to pursue it actively is definitely from his encouragement. He's always encouraged me to, to be a writer and to be a filmmaker and to pursue my art. He's--I went to a particular--couple of art schools as I was growing up and that was quite a bit through his, his ingenuity of getting me there or trying to get me in. His, his Aunt Norval who raised him was very stern. I never met her, she had died before I was born but he seemed to have a great deal of respect for her. She seemed to be a little--kind of a tough cookie and, you know, didn't take any crap from anybody and I think he appreciated that. He's the baby of the family, he's ten years younger than his sister. And, I don't know, I mean I guess it must be very difficult to, to not have your parents and have your brother and sister be so much older than you. But I think he got a lot of love and he felt, he felt very loved and taken care of. Story_ID: 378965 Speaker 1: So, about your own childhood, what are your earliest memories of growing up in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]? The very earliest memories you have of D.C.? Speaker 2: Earliest memories I have of D.C. I used to make up stories, I had paper dolls and I used to sit in the living room and play with them and I would make up stories about them that's what I remember, so I was probably three or four I guess when that was happening. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: So, your earliest memories is of paper dolls, and what, talk to me about what the paper dolls--were they white paper dolls or black paper dolls (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, they're white paper dolls. They're white paper dolls (laughter), I actually still have them. I don't let go of anything. There were two sets of paper dolls I had that I loved. One was a set of twins called Tina and Trudy, and they were two little white girls with red hair and freckles. And I don't know if something happened to them or, I decided to make another pair of them, and the pair that I made were black. So, I don't know if I have four of them or if I somehow destroyed the first two (laughter) and I had to replace them. And then there was another set I had called I think Tiny Tots, and it was three little girls. Even though I was the baby I always had this affinity toward middle children so it's a baby sister, a middle sister, and an older sister. And my favorite of the three was the middle sister. And I would just--they were very fashionable, they actually looked like they were in Paris [France]. And they had these fabulous little outfits that all of them had the same outfit and I would make up these little stories about the three of them. And I--everybody had a name. I mean, Tina and Trudy had their own names but my Tiny Tots I made up names for them and created these stories of the little adventures that they did. Speaker 2: So you were a writer as far back as you--you were creating--you were not writing the stories down but you were creating them in your head (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 2: Now where do you think that comes from, so early on you were doing it? Speaker 1: Um-hm. I mean I always thought I came out of the womb with a pencil. I mean I really--that's what I remember doing from the very beginning. The minute I had any--the paper dolls, my regular dolls--it was always about making stories up about them. There was always a family--I don't know--I mean, I probably was too young to remember it but telling stories I guess is a part of our family history, you know, this went--or gossiping even, maybe not even so much storytelling, gossiping (laughter) is probably part of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So there's a tradition in the family to pass stories down orally even if it's gossip (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes. (Laughter) You're very tactful, yes. Story_ID: 378966 Speaker 1: So what about some of the concrete memories of growing up, so that was your fantasy world but what was happening around you that you can remember, like what was it--the name of the street you lived on (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I lived on-- Speaker 1: And who lived next door to you? Speaker 2: Oh, let's see, the street I lived on--my address was 5211 12th Street NE. On the right side was Mr. and Mrs. Brown [ph.] and their son, Freddy [ph.]. On the left side was another Mr. and Mrs. Brown and their three sons, Brian [ph.], Michael [ph.] and I can't think, Gary [ph.], I think was the other son. It was a great neighborhood, it was an all-black neighborhood. I went to school six blocks away, LaSalle [Jessie LaSalle Elementary School; LaSalle-Backus Education Campus, Washington, D.C.]. And I walked to school, I had friends who lived in the neighborhood. I played in the streets with them all the time. I grew up in a house, we had a backyard, there was an alley behind the house that we played kickball in. It was great, it was all I knew and I loved it. It was really wonderful, and I guess a little sheltered in retrospect. But-- Speaker 1: Who were some of the other--who were the parents of some of the other children in the neighborhood and what were their jobs, like do you remember anybody's parents being doctors or-- Speaker 2: My next door neighbor, Mr. Brown, was a dentist. There were a lot--a lot of the women were homemakers. I mean, this was the early '60s [1960s]. A couple of my friends had single moms through, usually through divorce and so they worked. They usually worked in offices, everybody was professional. In D.C. [Washington, D.C.], most of where you work is the government so most people had good government jobs (laughter). But, yeah, everybody was professional in some way or another. I don't think there was anybody that was blue collar in the neighborhood, it was a very middle-class neighborhood. Speaker 1: But D.C, being sort of like a lot of historical events happening, you know, in the broader community, the March on Washington--things when you were young that were happening, do you remember any of that stuff and how it affected the community? Do you remember the community talking about Marian Anderson is going to sing or-- Speaker 2: I don't remember that. We lived sort of a ways away from downtown. I remember sometimes when we would be driving through downtown--I don't know exactly where we were going but there had been riots and you could see the burnt out buildings. Story_ID: 378967 Speaker 1: My father [Horace Carpenter] at some point when I was probably eight or so became very enamored with Elijah Muhammad. He stopped eating--we all stopped eating red meat (laughter). He started getting this paper. It wasn't Elijah Speaks [sic. Muhammad Speaks; Muslim Journal], he might have gotten that but there was this other paper that will never forget as long as I live. I don't know where it came from maybe it was put out by Black Panthers [Black Panther Party], and there would be these cartoons on the back cover every week or every month whenever it came out of like a woman--this powerful black woman with like an afro sitting on a stool with a gun pointed at a rat hole. And her baby would be on the stool next to her and the rat would be coming up behind to, to gnaw on the baby. I mean, these were the visuals of this paper that I remember. I mean, and they--I mean, every month there was some kind of comic that was--comic is probably the weird word but cartoon representation of the horrible living conditions of a lot of black people in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] which was very far removed from what I was experiencing. But my father was involved I guess as much as he felt comfortable so he didn't ever put himself or us at any kind of risk. But he was always aware of what was going on. Speaker 2: Did he become Muslim? Speaker 1: No, he did not become Muslim. Speaker 2: Okay, but he practiced the rituals, meaning you stopped eating red meat, you start--did you participate in sort of eating the bean pies and the-- Speaker 1: They bought them, I didn't like them but yes he did (laughter). And he probably, honestly, might have gone to meetings that I was not aware of. He was very interested. Speaker 2: And was this because of Malcom X or was it Elijah Muhammad, himself? Speaker 1: Well, at this point 'cause Malcolm died in what '63 [sic. 1965] so-- Speaker 2: Was it '63 [1963]? Speaker 1: I think it was '63 [1963], probably a combination of both ultimately probably Elijah Muhammad because Malcolm was, had already passed. And then, you know, a few years later--then Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]. He was--I don't know where he got it from, honestly. He was just--he was active and aware politically and I don't know that he spoke to me about it specifically, but I was very aware that my father was very proud to be black and instilled that in me. Speaker 2: How were you aware of that, what, what were some of the things that made you-- Speaker 1: He started wearing his hair in an afro. And when I was very young, I started wearing my hair in an afro. I was probably one of the first kids in my school to do it. Speaker 2: And back then it was called the natural (laughter). Speaker 1: Yes, yes. And it was not--you know, kids were, you know, girls were straightening their hair. It wasn't like it was popular, I mean, it took a certain amount of strength for me to do it, as I look back at it now, but because my dad it I felt like I had that strength. I, you know, I just went to school and I had my little natural. And people I'm sure teased me, and then they stopped. Speaker 2: Did your sister have one also? Speaker 1: She did, but I feel like she got hers, she was, I mean, Pat's [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter] six years older than me so she, I feel like she got it a little bit later than me 'cause I was really, really, I don't know, I was--I'm close to my mom [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] but there really was a connection between me and my dad that I really I guess trusted what he was doing. And if he had a natural and it was cool then, you know, it was okay for me to do it too. Speaker 2: Now you said you--he, you felt the sense that he was proud to be black. I mean, I guess I'm trying to get at, were their incidents that you remember that made you know that you had to be proud of being black, like you had to say, okay, I'm a minority this is something I have to embrace about myself as opposed to it's just who I am? Speaker 1: I mean, it was, it's the '60s [1960s], it's, we live in a very black community but when we go out to like go to the grocery stores, we're going to very, very white environments. I never saw my father kowtow to anyone. I got the sense of strength from him. I never was afraid and I did get the sense of pride, I mean, people were, like he started calling us black when that wasn't what people, most people were saying at that point. And I think the, that his interest in Elijah Muhammad and Martin Luther King and things like that is what instilled that kind of pride in him that he then sort of passed onto me not even, like I said, not necessarily consciously. Speaker 2: Did people come to the house, did people come to the house for some sort of--did people gather at the house and talk about what was going on? Speaker 1: No that they didn't do. Speaker 2: Did people gather in the community some place to talk about what was going on? Speaker 1: I don't, I don't feel like they did. I--maybe my memory is not totally accurate, I don't necessarily feel like the whole neighborhood felt the way my father felt, you know, they were very comfortable black people in a nice middle-class neighborhood. And they didn't necessarily wanna rock the boat. Speaker 2: Right, now, was your father any member of any organizations, men's groups, masonics, was he a Mason (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, he wasn't a Mason. I feel like I don't know for certain, I feel like he might have been a member of like a D.C. chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. I feel like that, but no, other than that, no. Story_ID: 378968 Speaker 1: Now were you a member of Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Any organizations like that growing up? Speaker 2: No, I'm not that, I'm not that middle class (laughter). Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], does that count? Speaker 1: Well, do you know about the brown paper bag test? Speaker 2: A little bit about it, yes, a little about it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You heard about it. What did you, how did you hear about it? Speaker 2: That I don't know. I probably heard about it as a, much older. My, my family is relatively light-skinned. My mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] is fair like me, my father [Horace Carpenter] is a little bit--is probably like Pat's [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter] complexion. Where I--yeah--my mother and I are, what's if you pass the paper bag test--if you're lighter than a paper bag it's all good. My mom and I are lighter than a paper bag; my dad is paper bag and darker (laughter). Speaker 1: Now, were you aware of light-skinned, dark-skinned within the black community that you grew up in [in Washington, D.C.]? Was it an issue, were light-skinned people considered something and dark-skinned people considered something? Do you have that recollection for your childhood? Speaker 2: Somewhat, yes. How can I explain it, people, I mean, yeah. In a weird kind of way kids, kids that I went to school with sometimes made disparaging remarks about other dark-skinned--about dark-skinned kids. But I guess at that point I didn't realize sort of how that, that was sort of internal racism that they might have been experiencing or expressing, but you know, you know, if a kid was really dark-skinned they might call him black whoever, black Mike or black Tom, or make some, some comment when they were trying to tease him or her. Hair, was actually probably a bigger, was a bigger thing, you know, people had good hair and straight hair, and oh, she's so pretty 'cause she got good hair and light eyes. So, yeah, I mean that kind of stuff definitely was there. Speaker 1: Now were you considered to have good hair and you're light-skinned (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No I didn't have good hair. I was light-skinned but I didn't have good hair and have a broad nose. Oh, one thing I do remember (laughter) when I was little, I did want to have, prior to the getting a natural, I did want long hair. And two things happened. I remember when I was probably seven or eight my sister gave me a fake braid and she pulled all my hair back and put it in a little pony-tail and she tied in this fake braid that was very long and down to my waist, and I remember when we went to the grocery store and I was just swinging my head and loving this braid. And another incident when I was probably around the same age where I cut two of my braids off to make them into a fake braid, so my mother was very upset when she came and I had ruined my hair and now I had to wear it like this one little hairstyle until it all grew out. But I just--I wanted long hair, I do remember that, desperately. Story_ID: 378969 Speaker 1: Now did the family attend church? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What church did you attend? Speaker 2: St. Stephens [St. Stephen and the Incarnation Episcopal Church, Washington, D.C.], it's an Episcopal Church, which I don't know, maybe it was my mother's [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] thing. We went, we went as a family. Speaker 1: Was it a black church or a mixed church (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. It was a mixed church. Speaker 1: Okay, now was that odd for a black family to go to a mixed church, were there other black--I mean, we say mixed but how mixed was it, 50/50, 60/40, 80/20, or were you the only black family in the church? Speaker 2: I don't think we were the only black family in the church, I don't know if it was 50/50 maybe 60/40. It was--I don't where we found it because it was not close to our, to our house. We had to go, it was on 16th Street [16th Street NW] and it was a ways away to get there. I guess it was progressive in that they somehow found out--my mother or my father [Horace Carpenter] somehow found out it was fairly progressive and that' how we ended up going there. The minister was a guy named Father Wendt [William A. Wendt] who actually performed Pat's [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter] wedding ceremony. Speaker 1: Is he black or white? Speaker 2: He's white. Speaker 1: What's his name? Speaker 2: Father Wendt, very cool white guy. He was just--I guess who he was is what created the church. He seemed very all-embracing and-- Speaker 1: Well, he married Pat so what do you know about him even that you can--about his history that you can give me even as an adult? You know, about his contributions to the community, I mean, what was it about him that made you guys travel all that way to-- Speaker 2: I guess the fact that he embraced a mixed church that, that was what he was, that he created it, or he was--and he was very, what I remember about the church we did, one thing I do remember about the church, rather, is that they did excerpts from 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'], the play in the church. I mean that's (laughter) that's pretty progressive. I felt like they were really, they were aware of what was going on and they, they acknowledged what was happening in the city and in the country. It wasn't just, you know, this little confined space. It talked--they talked about things that were actually happening in the world, and I think that's probably, you know, that's a testament to who he was. Speaker 1: Well at what point did your father started, start to embrace the, Elijah Muhammad and how did that affect your relationship with the Episcopal church? Speaker 2: I feel like I was probably like around seven or eight when he did that. Let me think, no maybe a little bit earlier, maybe I was six. I don't know if my father went to church because that's what my mother wanted to do. I don't actually, as an adult, as a older adult, he's become fairly religious. When I was growing up, he was not that at all. So he would come but he didn't necessarily seem--I don't know that he necessarily believed, he was just kind of there. He drove us (laughter) but I don't know that, that was his thing so it was just something my mom wanted to do. She--and when I had a chance to stop going, I guess I didn't really believe that much either so when I had a choice not to go, I didn't continue. Speaker 1: Were you baptized in the church? Speaker 2: I was baptized. Speaker 1: At what age? Speaker 2: I was really old, maybe six or seven actually. I didn't dislike church, I didn't--and it was a fine church but I had friends who went to a Baptist church which I (laughter) found much more interesting and much more rollicking. And I, when I had a choice I would prefer to go to my friends' church 'cause it just had a different energy. Story_ID: 378970 Speaker 1: What were holidays like, Christmas, Thanksgiving, July 4th, Easter? Speaker 2: All very, were all very--we're very family-oriented family so all of those holidays were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But it was a small family because it was just the four of you? Speaker 2: Yes, but we would--my mom [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] is very close to her sister [Virginia Tyler Lancaster] who has two sons that I grew up with who--they're older than me but I grew up with them, Kenny [ph.] and Carl [ph.]. My dad's sister [Norville Carpenter] has two daughters who are the same age as my sister [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter] and me, and we were very close so we spent a lot a holidays with them. My sister had a godmother at the time who we were very close to. My aunt was my godmother and another woman around the corner. So we--they became big family events. Easter, actually--a holiday that I no longer celebrate at all, I barely even acknowledge as an adult, the family would come over sometimes my mom's family sometimes my dad's or a combination and we would have our little ham (laughter) and we would sit around the dining room table. We would, you know, the tablecloth would come out and the good china and the glasses so it was, they were big deals for the family. Speaker 1: And Christmas? Speaker 2: Christmas was good, Christmas was--Christmas was intimate on the day, on the morning of and then the day of but later on for dinner we would either go to someone's house or they would come to our house. Speaker 1: All right, what age did you realize that there was no Santa Claus? Speaker 2: I don't know how long--I, I probably knew fairly young 'cause I had a friend that I went to school with who loved to burst everyone's bubbles about things so he probably said it when I was about seven or eight. And I probably tried to hold on to it 'til maybe nine or ten. But I don't know if I maybe came downstairs and saw my father [Horace Carpenter] putting together a bike or something and then I realized (laughter) that, that, well, if there had been a Santa there was no need for my dad to do this. But I think I liked the mythology of it and I didn't wanna, I didn't wanna let it go (laughter). Story_ID: 378971 Speaker 1: You just asked me about Christmas and I remember the story about my dad [Horace Carpenter]. When I was about, I don't know, seven or so I wanted this doll called Dancerina for Christmas. She was a little ballet doll and you put batteries in her and she had a little crown on and if you lifted the thing of her crown, she would spin and she could walk on her toes. So he got me one for Christmas. He got me a black one and she didn't work, so we took her back to the store and they didn't have any more black ones, which was very devastating to my father. I don't know if it was quite as devastating to me, I wanted the doll. So we got a white one and he spray painted her brown, and we tried to dye her hair which was blonde and it turned out gray (laughter). But it was really important to him for me to have a black doll. Speaker 2: Now what year was this? Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968] maybe. Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968], so that would have been the year King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. So, I mean, those, it's those kinds of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So King would have been killed in April, which would have been--which would make sense when Christmas comes you have to have a black doll. Speaker 1: But, I mean, those are the kinds of things where he didn't say to me, "Shari [HistoryMaker Shari Carpenter], be proud of being black," but it was important to him. I had a choice between a white Dancerina and a black one and he got me a black one, and there was no question about it. So, those were those--that was the kind of thing that instilled these feelings in me. Now you asked me about when was I aware? Speaker 2: Right. Of what--yeah, when you were aware that people would discriminate against you based on the fact that your skin color was different? Speaker 1: That's a good question. 'Cause I had led, I guess I probably was mildly aware of it when we would go shopping at this shopping center not far from our house but was actually in Maryland called Jim [ph.]; it was sort of the equivalent of a Kmart [Kmart Corporation] now. And Jim was, the area that Jim was in was very white. It was almost as if there was a line drawn in the sand and if you crossed the line one way you were in totally black D.C. [Washington, D.C.], if you crossed it the other way, you were in totally white Maryland. And so there I think I was aware that like little kids would look at me strangely 'cause I'm, I mean, it would be possible for my family and me to be the only black people in the store at a time possibly. And I would see other kids looking at me, I don't know what I made of it but I guess that's when I was aware of it. An incident that I remember very, very clearly but it isn't about my discrimination, but when I was in the fifth grade I had a white teacher, which first time I had any real, honestly, real connection with a white person and I was ten. And I remember coming--running home from school telling my mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter], my teacher is white, my teacher is white, Kathy O'Rourke [ph.]. I was--I had never had such a close relationship with a white person before and it was astound- it was amazing to me (laughter), and I don't know why. But I guess at that moment I really--it was very, very clear to me that there was a difference between black people and white people. And then I guess from that point on I would go to the stores, I guess when I noticed I went to stores and people, the guard would follow me and my friends around, so probably maybe ten or eleven I started to be aware of it. Story_ID: 378972 Speaker 1: What sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Sounds, when I was little there was, you know, the locusts, the locusts came one year (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Rubbing their wings, how they (imitates locusts). Speaker 2: Yes, the locusts came one year and I remember that, I hate that sound but I do remember it. And I remember I wanted a rabbit and my dad [Horace Carpenter] said, "I got you a present." And I thought it was gonna be a rabbit and I opened the bag and it's a locust (laughter). Those sounds, fried chicken cooking in the--oh, fried chicken cooking in the kitchen. We ate crabs a lot when I was a kid and we would go down to the wharf and get a bushel of live crabs, and my father would bring them home and cook them. And he would tease us, he would pretend to drop them on the floor and chase us around and pretend like they were, you know, trying to get at our legs. So, all base seasonings and those kinds of things that he would use to season the crabs is very prominent in my memory. Music, we always played, you know, Marvin Gaye, The Supremes, all that Motown stuff, we were playing all the time. My mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] loved Sam Cooke. Speaker 1: Who else? Because this is rich, this fills out, these are the influences that you would later embrace and maybe even write about. Okay, go ahead--and music I'm interested in, who else did you (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I loved The Jackson 5 so I have their entire collection. My mom loved Sam Cooke. There was a lot of Marvin Gaye in the house, The Temptations we loved. My father was more jazzy, he liked this trio--what the heck were they call- I can't think of the name of them. It was a woman and two guys and he would play them all the time. They feel like they were kind of Manhattan Transfer-like but they were before them and I can't think of what the name of the group was but he played it--there was a lot of music in the house. My father had a good stereo system; there was music playing in the basement all the time, radio in the kitchen was always on-- Story_ID: 378973 Speaker 1: Now what did your father [Horace Carpenter]--did your father do government work? Speaker 2: He did do government work. Speaker 1: On the side because he was a painter? Speaker 2: Well, that was not, that's not how he made his living. Speaker 1: Okay, how did he make his living (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He worked in the--everybody (laughter) in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] works in the government. Speaker 1: Okay. And your mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] did as well? Speaker 2: My mother did but not--she did I think before Pat [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter] was born and maybe even a little bit when Pat was young, once I came along she stopped working. She was pretty much a stay-at-home mom. She substitute taught every now and again when I was a kid. My father worked in the government and I guess what he was doing was sort of drafting. He worked at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] at one point and then he worked in another branch of the government, and I can't remember which. Speaker 1: So, he was a drafter as well? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So, where did he train? Speaker 2: He went to college. Don't ask me where 'cause I don't remember but he did go to school to learn technical drawing. Now that you're asking me these questions, makes me wanna go back and ask him too. I don't know where he started to draw but I guess he always loved to do it, and he went to school and learned technical drawing. He wanted to go in the [U.S. military] service but for some reason he, he wanted to go into the service and go to the war--'50s [1950s], Korean War maybe. And he didn't for whatever reason, I don't know, maybe some health-related issue or something. They didn't take him, and I think he always had some feelings about that. I think my uncle [William Carpenter, Jr.] went--both, two of my uncles went. I think it bothered him that he didn't get to go. So he went to college or he went to school and, and learned technical drawing. And that's what he used for many, many years in his work career, but always in the government, yes. Story_ID: 378974 Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school? Speaker 2: I went to Jessie LaSalle Elementary School [LaSalle-Backus Education Campus, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Now who is Jessie LaSalle? Speaker 2: I have no idea. (Laughter) Somebody who got a school named after him or her (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was, was it a black educator? Speaker 2: Probably, probably, yeah. It was a black school, definitely. Speaker 1: Predomin- all black? Speaker 2: All black. Speaker 1: Okay, and what part of D.C. [Washington, D.C.] was this school in? Speaker 2: It's in Northeast, D.C. [Northeast, Washington, D.C.] not far from where I grew up. Six blocks I walked to school every day. Speaker 1: So, who were some of the teachers that made impressions on you in elementary school? Speaker 2: I guess the one who made the biggest impression was my fourth grade teacher, Mr. Powell [ph.] my first male teacher. And-- Speaker 1: What did he teach you? Speaker 2: What did he teach? Well, in that, at that point--as I remember at that point they taught everything. They taught math, reading, it's not like you have periods, you just stayed your entire day with them. He drove a Corvette [Chevrolet Corvette], which was, I thought was very cool and he was a bachelor and he was kind of attractive, or very attractive, actually. And, not that my other teachers were old but he seemed young. There was something very youthful about him and we, we did a play, we created a play as our class, which was about what your parents do when the father is supposedly going off to work and the mother is staying home. And the play had the mother sitting on the couch with curlers in her hair watching TV all day long and right before the husband comes home she gets up to get, you know, to get it together and clean the house and make dinner. And the father supposedly goes out and starts gambling. And we were having the best time in the world creating this play, and I guess other teachers got wind of it or something and they shut us down. I guess they just thought this was not the appropriate thing (laughter) for fourth grade students to--I mean I remember so vividly one of the, Raymond [ph.] was playing the father in his play, and Mr. Powell was teaching Raymond how to shoot craps in, for the play (laughter). I mean, I guess if you heard that in another class, you'd be like, what in heavens name is going on here, our teacher is teaching the child how to shoot craps. But I, I loved him, he was--he made, I liked school anyway but he made school very exciting. And I guess he played into my storytelling. Speaker 1: What subjects were you good at or good in? Speaker 2: I was great in--I was actually good in everything at that age. I liked reading, I was probably good in history, I was good in math. At that point, I did really, really well. It wasn't until a little bit later on when I got into junior high school [Bertie Backus Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], when I started to have difficulties with certain subjects. Speaker 1: Now were you, would you say you were taught black history in school or was that something, something you learned at home? Speaker 2: Oddly enough, although I went to black schools, I think I probably learned more black history at home than I did in school because they were teaching what was in the textbooks and the textbooks weren't necessarily emphasizing that. So, no, I think I got a better--it seems like history now but it probably, I mean, it wasn't even history at that point. I mean, it was Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] being shot and, you know, Malcom X who I actually probably I didn't hear about until much later in my life, but that was, it wasn't even history. It was what was going on in that moment, now. Yeah, black history had, maybe we learned about Ro- no, we, I was about to say maybe we learned about Rosa Parks but no, we probably didn't learn about Rosa Parks at that point. We learned about George Washington [President George Washington] crossing the Delaware [Delaware River], you know, [President] Abraham Lincoln freed the slaves. That's what we were learning. So, and I don't necessarily think my teachers were, with the exception of Mr. Powell, tremendously progressive in certain ways. Story_ID: 378975 Speaker 1: So who at this point in your life would you consider to have been a role model, from first to fourth grade? Speaker 2: Let's see how old am I at that point. I was in love with [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni, she was a--I, my father [Horace Carpenter] took me to hear her read a few times when I was young. I loved her poetry, I loved her. She was a single mom, for a long time I thought I wanna be a single mom like Nikki Giovanni (laughter). She was probably my role model when I was growing up. Speaker 1: So, tell me when did you hear her read for the first time? Tell me about that incident because that's, that's big for a child? Speaker 2: I don't know how old I was, I would say maybe ten, maybe twelve, maybe it was at a college that she spoke. I sort of feel like a big sort of, not a conference room but a lecture hall is what I'm imagining. And she was just this small woman but so powerful in talking about all these experiences of being black. And at that point, I kind of was interested in poetry and I thought I wanted to be a poet maybe and I started writing poetry that I thought was in the vein of Nikki Giovanni and about being black and black pride and black power. Speaker 1: At ten years old? Speaker 2: Yeah. And my father, I don't wanna shortchange my mom [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] so please make me talk about her, but he found this book for me when I was a kid by a young poet who was probably the same age as me and it was called 'Poems by Kali' [Kali Grosvenor], and she was a young black woman. Vertamae Grosvenor [Vertamae Smart-Grosvenor] is a writer I think and that was her mom [Kali Grosvenor], and she'd had this book of poems published at ten and my father some way or other found this book and I got it and I loved it. And she was writing Nikki Giovanni-esque as well so I really was like, oh, this is what I wanna do. So these were the people that were kind of influencing me and they were very different from what was going on in my immediate life. Speaker 1: Just briefly then, who was influencing Pat [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter]? Speaker 2: Let's see. Speaker 1: If you are being influenced by Nikki Giovanni in poetry you wanted to be at the time, what was your older sister doing? Because you're ten, she's sixteen. Speaker 2: Pat was very much into art, she wanted to be a fashion designer at that point. She was going to a program, I guess at sixteen she had started a Workshops for Careers in the Arts, which I think was the predecessor to what became the Duke Ellington School of the Arts [Washington, D.C.]. So, Mike Malone and dancers and singers and theater, she was doing, she was doing a lot of outdoor theater in addition to her wanting to be a fashion designer. So she was being influenced by theater people. And we would go see her do these plays and they were great. Speaker 1: So did you share the poetry with anyone in school? Speaker 2: Oh, in school, no. Speaker 1: So you didn't write, you didn't take these poems to school and read and recite them? They were for the family at home? Speaker 2: They were more for me. Speaker 1: More for you. Can you remember one that you've committed to memory that you can recite (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) No, no, no. I don't remember. Speaker 1: Not even one? Not even one line? Speaker 2: I'm sure they were very bad. No, I can't, I honestly can't remember and if I remembered something it would probably be someone else's poem that I've taken on as my own. No. It lasted for a while but it didn't, I mean, what I--it was a phase. What I really wanted to do was write stories and so the poetry was just a little digression for a little while. But I admired Nikki Giovanni for a very, very long time. I remember there was an article about her in Ebony magazine and I cut it out; I still have that article to this day, cause' I just thought what a cool woman she's, you know, she's doing her thing and she's got this son, Tommy [Thomas Watson Giovanni], that she's raising by herself. Story_ID: 378976 Speaker 1: So, junior high school, teachers that influenced you during those let's say sixth, seventh and eighth grade? Speaker 2: I went to Bertie Backus [Bertie Backus Junior High School, Washington, D.C.], which was three blocks from home so I got to walk to school again. Speaker 1: A black school also? Speaker 2: Also a black school. Probably had some white teachers, don't know if it had any white students, probably had a few white teachers. Speaker 1: But at the Jessie [Jessie LaSalle Elementary School; LaSalle-Backus Education Campus, Washington, D.C.] school is where you encountered the first-- Speaker 2: White teacher (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) white teacher in fifth grade? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So then let's say seven, eighth--sixth, seventh and eighth Speaker 2: Seventh, eighth and ninth. Speaker 1: Seventh, eighth and ninth you're at the-- Speaker 2: At Backus. Speaker 1: Backus. And there, again, is an all-black school? Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty much so. Speaker 1: Who influenced you during that time? Speaker 2: Junior high school, I don't know who influenced me. Somebody who I remember is my algebra teacher, Mrs. Debow [ph.]. That's when I started doing badly in school actually. I took algebra in the seventh grade and failed miserably, although, they tried to give me a tutor, they tried to help me. I just could not grasp algebra to save my life. And she tried very hard (laughter), I have to hand it to her. And it just wasn't my thing. I don't know, I guess at that point, at that point you start going to school and you have different periods so I probably had six or seven teachers each year, and I'm trying to remember-- Speaker 1: But no one jumps out as having influenced you during those years? Speaker 2: In junior high school, no. Speaker 1: What type of a student were you in junior high school, rambunctious, quiet? Speaker 2: I was pretty quiet; I've always been pretty quiet. I'm fairly shy and introverted. I think one of the things, one of the things that stands out to me in junior high school is that it was--I was now going to school with a different, with different kids. All the kids that from my neighborhood went to this junior high school, but it also catered to another neighborhood that I had never experienced before. I guess Michigan Park [Washington, D.C.] is what it was called. So I was meeting a bunch of new kids which was hard for me 'cause I don't necessarily think I get along, I don't do that--I'm shy so I don't necessarily come right out immediately so getting used to this new group of people was a little difficult. And, you know, they came in with their own cliques and some of them were popular and it was all this crazy, you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But at this time, at this age you still wanted to be a writer? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: Did you have any idea how to pursue writing? In junior high school, did you think, okay, I'm gonna go to college and major in English or I'm going to--were you having those thoughts at the time? Speaker 2: I was, there were conversations that were coming up because at that point wanting to be a creative writer was not as accessible as it is now, so sometimes when I said I wanted to be a writer, people thought I wanted to be a journalist and that's what they tried to steer me towards which I didn't actually have any interests in whatsoever. But there weren't necessarily any creative writing programs for them to steer me towards. So I did a lot of writing on my own. My father [Horace Carpenter] didn't necessarily always read my writing but he was aware that I was always writing and he was always on the lookout for programs. Speaker 1: Was your mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] aware of it also? Speaker 2: She was but I don't feel like she was as active in trying to help me pursue it. I also, maybe because of Pat [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter], had an interest in theatre so I actually joined a children's theatre when I was in junior high school at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] for a summer. Speaker 1: Where you performed as an actress or as a writer? Speaker 2: I performed as an actress. Speaker 1: As an actress? Speaker 2: Yes, it was a circus play that we did so I was one of the circus performers. Those kinds of environments allowed me to come out of myself in a way that I probably would not normally have and I really appreciated them, and I got to meet another group of people. Speaker 1: Did Howard have any other impact on your life, being that you were right there in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and it was there? Speaker 2: I didn't wanna go there (laughter) that's the impact that it had. Speaker 1: And you didn't wanna go there because it's too close to home? Speaker 2: It was too close to home, I'd been in D.C. for eighteen years I needed to, I need to go someplace else, yeah. So, I guess the thing that I remember most from junior high school was doing the children's theatre at Howard University. The rest of it sort of blurs together in my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so high school-- Story_ID: 378977 Speaker 1: Where did you go to high school? Speaker 2: I went to two high schools. I went to--when I was fifteen, when I was fifteen my father's [Horace Carpenter] job transferred him to Dallas, Texas so I went to high school for a year, we lived in Dallas for a year and a half so I went to my freshman year of high school was in Dallas. And we moved into this little development community called Duncanville [Texas]. Speaker 1: Black? Speaker 2: No, no, no (laughter), so based on where we lived, where I would have ended up going is Duncanville High School [Duncanville, Texas], which had seven hundred students, twenty-five black. And I think my father was very clear that if that's where I ended up, I was probably not gonna be long for this world 'cause I just didn't have--I had no tools to deal with white people on that level. And they would tease me and tell me I had the cutest little southern accent, and I'm thinking I'm in Texas and you're telling me I got a cute southern accent. It was just, I don't know, it felt very condescending so my father found a performing arts high school in Dallas that I ended up transferring to. He tried to--they didn't have writing per se, so he spoke to my English teacher and we did a sort of a one-on-one mentoring things for me to continue writing, but I became a drama major there and so I did theatre for a year there. And I initially hated Dallas when we first moved there but I once I got to go to that high school I had a great time, I loved it, you know. Speaker 1: And then you came back to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] after that year and a half (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I came back to D.C. and I went to McKinley High School [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: And how do you spell that M-C-K-I-N-L-E-Y? Speaker 2: Yes. We--because I had come from a performing arts high school in Dallas, the first thing we did when we got back is we tried to get me into Duke Ellington [Duke Ellington School of the Arts] in D.C.. Speaker 1: Where your sister [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter] had gone? Speaker 2: Where she went to a version of. She went to McKinley but she went to Duke Ellington as an after-school kind of program. So she, we tried to get into Duke Ellington, their deadline had actually already passed so they let me audition but I didn't actually get in and I was crushed. And, ingenious person that my dad is, he found this school--this program called Lemuel A. Penn Center [Washington, D.C.], which was a program that specialized in photography, creative writing, journalism, and film making for teenagers. And so I would, because I at that point I had a lot of credits for some reason, I would go to McKinley in the morning and take my classes and then I would go to Penn Center which was a few blocks away from my main high school (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was called P-E-N Center? Speaker 2: P-E-N-N. Speaker 1: P-E-N-N Center. Speaker 2: And I would go there in the afternoon and I would take writing classes. Speaker 1: And was it called Penn Center of the Performing Arts or just Penn Center? Speaker 2: No, Lemuel A. Penn Center. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I took creative writing, I took fiction writing. And we created literary arts journals so I got published a couple of times--three times I suppose. And in the afternoon all I did was write. Story_ID: 378978 Speaker 1: Did you ever go to the movies during this time from (simultaneous) -- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did. Speaker 1: --a little girl to high- what were some of the movies that stood out for you. I mean, at the time, you had Bill Cosby and Sidney Poitier, they did 'Let's Do It Again' I remember and 'Let's Do It Again 2' [sic. 'A Piece of the Action'] and (laughter)-- Speaker 2: No, (laughter) I saw a lot of different movies. I saw--in school I think they took us to see 'Gone with the Wind' when I was probably in about the fourth grade, and they took us to see a musical version of 'Scrooge' at the movies with Albert Finney maybe. So those are two school related projects, I mean, school related things I remember. We went to--I saw a lot of black--I guess-- Speaker 1: Blaxploitation. Speaker 2: Yes. There was a movie theater that wasn't far from my house and my friends and I would walk and you could (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it was the black theater? Speaker 2: Okay, I guess it was. Speaker 1: Yeah, because it showed the--like the Bruce Lee movies and the-- Speaker 2: It showed the Bruce Lee movies, it showed 'Blacula,' it showed-- Speaker 1: 'Blacula,' 'Dolemite,' 'Coffy,' 'Cleopatra Jones,' 'T.N.T.' ['T.N.T. Jackson'] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, 'Cleopatra Jones' all that stuff, and you could go and see three movies for, you know, in a day. And that's what we would--we would come in the morning and just stay all day long. We would run in and out and buy popcorn, we'd go to the bathroom but we just stayed there all day long. Speaker 1: Well, I gotta confess at this moment. When I saw the movie 'Blacula,' I'm like, that's what I wanna do. (Laughter) A black vampire (laughter). Speaker 2: I loved 'Cleopatra Jones,' she was my favorite. She was absolutely my favorite. A movie that I remember I was probably twelve, twelve or thirteen. My sister took me to see 'Cornbread, Earl and Me' when I was about thirteen and that--I'll never forget that because it was these, you know, it's very reminiscent of today now--basketball player running down the street, in the wrong place, at the wrong time, gets shot by the cops. And the way that the white cops intimidate all the black people in this neighborhood and finally this one kid, Laurence Fishburne's character actually has the courage to stand up and say, "That's not right, he wasn't doing anything, you shot him." And I will never, ever forget it as long as I live. So, Pat [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter] took me to movies, my father [Horace Carpenter] took me to movies and-- Speaker 1: Did you see 'Cooley High'? Speaker 2: I saw 'Cooley High.' I don't remember when or where but I definitely saw 'Cooley High.' Speaker 1: But you say 'Cornbread, Earl and Me' had the most effect on you as far as movies? The one who spoke to you and okay. Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh. I don't know, it was just, I mean, yeah. It definitely did. It was--there was something about this kid, I love seeing movies where there're people that are like my age that I can relate to who are doing these very, very brave things. And that's what that character was like for me, that he stood up. Speaker 1: Did that in any way turn you on to your, the possibilities you may have as a writer and connect you to film making? What became your link to film making in these early years? Speaker 2: At that, in the early years it never occurred to me that I could make films. It seemed, even though I'm seeing movies that are taking place in neighborhoods that are somewhat reminiscent of mine, it just never occurred to me that it was something that I could do. It still seemed like something that happened over there. Speaker 1: So, seeing those movies, what was happening--I mean, you were connecting with the stories that were being told but not the fact that you could actually tell the stories through this medium? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah. I would--they would inspire me to probably write similar stories of my own but I didn't write them as scripts, I wrote them as narratives, as potential novels or short stories. But that's--but they were definitely impacting me, but it was years later before I ever realized that I actually could do film. Speaker 1: What year did you graduate high school? Speaker 2: I graduated high school in '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: And this is McKinley? Speaker 2: McKinley Tech [McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.] is what it was called at the time (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) McKinley Tech. Story_ID: 378979 Speaker 1: And 1979 you graduate [from McKinley Technical High School; McKinley Technology High School, Washington, D.C.], did you know where you were going to school? How did the process of getting you into college come about? Speaker 2: Actually, in the eleventh grade, I took the PSATs [Preliminary Scholastic Aptitude Test] and I did very, very well. One of my writer friends from Penn Center [Lemuel A. Penn Center, Washington, D.C.] was a year older than me, Allen Wade [ph.], I think his name was and he was about to go to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] because they had a good writing program. And because of having good PSATs, Oberlin started courting me so that's actually where I thought I was gonna go for a very long time. I was like, "Oh, I know I wanna go to Oberlin, that's it." And then I became a senior and my father [Horace Carpenter] said, "You know, maybe you should, you know, Oberlin's fine if that's where you wanna go but maybe you should think about looking at some other schools." And then we went on this rampage applying to it feels like a gazillion schools. I know I, I know I applied to Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] I know I remember that, Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York], NYU [New York University, New York, New York], of course Oberlin. Those are the ones I remember but I'm sure there were others. And I went to--now my father said very casually, "Oh, you might end up at Oberlin, who knows you might end up at I don't know," and he just pull a name out of his--NYU. So I came to New York [New York] to do some school visits and I went to Barnard which actually had a good writing program but they were so disorganized when I went for the visit. They had set me up to go sit in on a class, the class didn't meet the day that I came. It was just very, very disorganized. And then when I went down to NYU for their campus visit, they were so organized, they were so prepared for me to come. They had somebody to show me around, the class I sat in was really interesting. They didn't have a writing program per se, you would have to be in the English department and take classes but it was so, I liked the campus and I liked the way they treated me. So, somehow or another Oberlin totally went out the window and NYU became the place that I wanted to go. And that's where I actually ended up going. Speaker 1: And what year did you come to New York to start NYU? Speaker 2: Probably fall of '79 [1979]. Speaker 1: So you came to New York when it was like in the '70s [1970s] or the early '80s [1980s], like the heyday of graffiti and the-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Was it what you see in the movies nowadays when people speak to the old New York and the--what was, what was your life like at NYU in the early '80s [1980s]. Speaker 2: I still, although I'd had my little Dallas [Texas] experience, I still felt like I was a very sheltered black girl, and I was unprepared for NYU in terms of the fact that there's forty thousand students and 10 percent black so it was very easy for me to be one, the only one or one of two black people in a class. I thought I was a good student when I came to NYU, I don't feel like I was so well prepared from my schooling in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] for college, so I was--you know, where I'd always been more of an A minus or B plus student in D.C., I was now a C student at NYU 'cause the workload was just more than anything I had expected. And oddly enough, I said I didn't wanna go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], (laughter) the first six months at NYU I was like, maybe I should go back to D.C. and go to Howard. I had a really hard time. I had, I remember the first day when they moved me into the dorm, and on the dorm they had the names of your other roommates. So there was Pat Kio [ph.] and somebody else, and Dawn Outlaw [ph.], and I remember my sister [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter] and my father and my mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] were standing at the door and were looking like, "Well, okay, Pat Kio, she's definitely not a black girl. Whoever, whoever, she's definitely not a black girl. Dawn Outlaw, she might be black." And Dawn Outlaw it turned out was black but she didn't wanna have anything do with me. So, we had this huge room. It was a huge double, three beds in one room, two beds in another, and I took the smaller room. And as it turned out I didn't have a roommate the entire rest of the semester. The three of--Dawn, Pat and the other woman all came in and took the big room and they all proceeded to hang out and become buddies. And I was sort of like this outcast in this small room by myself. So the first six months I was not happy. Speaker 1: How did you spend your time in the first six months? Speaker 2: Going to class, going to the library, and being, I don't know who I hung out with. There're probably a couple of black people that I found but somewhere in there I found the Black Student Union and that's--he's tapping you is that? Speaker 1: Oh, that's my signal that the tape's--we have a minute left on this tape. Speaker 2: Okay, I found the Black Student Union and I joined that and then I felt comfortable because I found a world that I could maneuver in, because I had, you know, I have to go to class every day and interact with all these white people but I needed an outlet. I mean, I'm a black girl from D.C. so. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Story_ID: 378980 Speaker 1: I found the Black Student Union and there were not--there're not a lot of black clubs at least at that point on NYU's [New York University, New York, New York] campus, so you kind of joined them all. They had a black science club, which was for the pre-med students, (laughter) but you joined it anyway just to be part of other black people. I mean, we weren't, it was much more, they were all social groups really. People just needed an outlet from the environment. For me, I think it was especially difficult 'cause a lot of the students I went to school with were commuting from home so this was just a small part of their life. They had another life but I was living in the dorms, you know. It really wasn't, there weren't a whole lot of black people and I needed that, I missed that. I needed the community, so. Speaker 2: Who were some of the teachers, who were your influences at NYU? Speaker 1: Oy vey (laughter). Speaker 2: What? Speaker 1: I said oy vey. Who were my influences at NYU? Gosh. Speaker 2: And they can be other students. Who were the other students and that you--that were in your class, influences, other students, role models? Speaker 1: I had, okay, let me think about it. Well, the first couple of years, the first couple of years I didn't--I hadn't declared a major so I was just taking sort of all kinds of liberal arts classes. And then I met a guy (laughter) who was an actor, and by my third year I had to declare a major and I fell in love with this actor. And I called my mom [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] and my dad [Horace Carpenter] and I said, "Mom and dad I think I wanna be, I think I wanna go into the acting program." And their hair stood on their heads (laughter), they were not having it. So, I said if I audition for the program and I get in, can I go? And they said, yes, grudgingly I guess thinking maybe she's not gonna get in. But I auditioned for the program and I got in. So, the first two years feel very blurry, I was--I don't remember many of those teachers. I had--by my second year I had a black roommate, two black roommates. At one point I met a woman who would be my roommate off-campus much later, she was actually I think a political science major. Her name was Michelle [ph.], she was very powerful, heavyset black woman, very vocal, you know, we're gonna take down the system kind of person. And she was a great (laughter), she was a great influence and a hoot to be around. And then-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Did she actually say we're gonna take down the system? Speaker 1: No, not exactly (laughter) but that's--it's funny she introduced me--like, I think--I had heard of Bob Marley when I was in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] I'd heard 'Jammin' that was the only thing I knew about Bob Marley, and Michelle loved Bob Marley so she introduced me to all his music and I started to love him too. I think originally I thought, oh, what's with the hair and, you know, I was so sheltered. And she was like, "Bob, are you kidding me, you don't know Bob Marley?" She would play this music for me and I just fell in love with it. And she, she loved all the Motown stuff so we would play all that kind of stuff too. She was same age as me so we had the same sort of references, and I think she was probably from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] originally. But I went into, so my third and fourth year, third and fourth and half of another year, I was a theater major--acting major. So those are the teachers I remember the most. Speaker 2: Who were some of the other students in that class, that either were--that were actors? Speaker 1: John Leguizamo and I went to school together. Speaker 2: He didn't go for long though, did he, or did he complete (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I think he stayed, yeah. I loved--my favorite stories about John are that they treated him so badly at NYU. They were--they did not treat him well at all. So I have gotten great pleasure out of his success 'cause I like--feel like, you know, you got the last laugh. Speaker 2: How did they--how could they, yeah? Speaker 1: Well, you know, my acting teachers sometimes they can be--sometimes acting teachers are frustrated actors and so they can be very brutal in their critique of your work. And they were very hard on lots of us, and very hard on John. I don't think they liked him; I don't think they thought he was ever gonna amount to anything (laughter) which is why I love that he's done so well. And then there, you know, then there're the actors that everybody's like, oh, my goodness they're gonna be famous, and you never hear from them again (laughter). Two of my friends who are actually my friends now I met in the acting department, my friend Keith Allen [ph.] and my friend Sam Christian [ph.], two black guys. I think the only black people in my class, and we just became, you know, this little trio of hanging out and being each other's support system. Story_ID: 378981 Speaker 1: Now, did you throw yourself into black theater as well, I mean (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, God, no. Speaker 1: No, okay. Speaker 2: No, no, no. At NYU [New York University, New York, New York], they never did a black production. This was one of the things we rallied--the black students rallied around. They brought in a director who I can't remember now, but one of the main stage productions that they were gonna do was gonna be called--was a play called 'The House of Connelly' [Paul Green], which is a planation play so the only roles in this play for black people are slaves. So, we're like, the only play you all have ever done that's black is a plantation play (laughter) so we boycotted it. Many people refused even to audition for it. And one of my friends actually did audition for it, my friend, Keith [Keith Allen (ph.)], and we were all very angry at him for a very long time for auditioning and getting a part in this play. I mean, we boycotted and it got-- Speaker 1: So, the play went on? Speaker 2: The play went on, but things got better because we spoke out about, this is crazy. Can you not see how offensive this is to us? But, I don't know, it's like when I look back on it, it's probably--things were probably a little more political than they seemed at the time so what happened was a lot of students started doing--putting up their own productions in the Black Box Theatre [New York, New York]. So a friend did--a friend of mine did 'The Death of Bessie Smith' [Edward Albee], another friend--actually, a white guy did the 'Dutchman' [Amiri Baraka], so people started to do their own black or racially-motivated productions, but the school itself, they weren't catering to us. And in my actual theater program--'cause what happens at NYU, I don't know if you know, you go to different--we were in undergraduate drama so you go to--you take your classes at different acting studios so I was at Strasberg [Lee Strasberg Theatre Institute; Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute, New York, New York]. There are a couple of other studios that they work with as well, so none of the work that we were doing at Strasberg was black. I mean, you could pick your own scenes but I only had like two other people (laughter) I could do scenes with if I wanted to do a black scene, so you just did whatever, you know, whatever you could. Speaker 1: Now, had Spike Lee gone to NYU prior to you? Speaker 2: Spike and I were actually there at the same time. I did not know him 'cause he was in graduate film. And as ironic as it is, I didn't, I wasn't interested in film at NYU so I didn't even know much about their film department. I took some writing, I took some screen writing classes in their film department but that's all I knew about it. So, in my third year--I think it was my third year, I moved out of the dorms and I moved to an apartment in Brooklyn [New York] with two other friends from school. And Spike remembers to this day that he used to see me on the subway going back and forth to NYU and he would try and talk to me and I wouldn't give him the time of day, which is possible (laughter), it's very possible. But, yeah, every now and again he loves to throw that in my face-- Story_ID: 378982 Speaker 1: Now, what happened with you and your, your acting career, and, you know, what happened with the school? Do you, completed the program? Speaker 2: I completed the program, it's interesting, I completed the program and--but I'm very security driven, and so a couple months out of college [New York University, New York, New York] there was no money coming in from acting and I didn't see any money coming in from acting (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you got a B.A.? Speaker 2: I have a B.A. in drama. What was happening at that point, this is 1984 so what was happening, I guess what was happening for black people in the arts was probably much more theater. But in terms of like film and television, there basically seemed to be soap operas. And if you didn't look like what was happening on the soap operas at the time, which I certainly didn't-- Speaker 1: Right, and then we had, what was it with Mr. Drummond [Phillip Drummond] who was the-- Speaker 2: Oh, 'Diff'rent Strokes.' Speaker 1: 'Diff'rent Strokes,' and then we had the girl [HistoryMaker Kim Fields], 'Facts of Life' ['The Facts of Life'], you had the one black actress on-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but they're all out in California. And I've said before, if Rosie Perez had come along a few years earlier, I might have continued to pursue acting but I just didn't see that I was every gonna really be able to make a living at doing it. Speaker 1: Now, what were you wearing your hair like at the time? Speaker 2: It was straight. (Laughter) It was fried, dyed and laid to the side. It was, it was processed at that point. In '84 [1984] it still was. Speaker 1: When did you give up the natural? Speaker 2: When did I give it up? I started locking my hair in '89 [1989] so I cut--I was very resistant to the notion that I had to do this but I eventually had to cut it all off to get back to the natural, so it was probably that short before I started locking it. Speaker 1: No, but I mean when did you go from the natural (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, when did I give up the natural when I was a kid. Oh, probably about--I think about twelve. When I went to junior high school [Bertie Backus Junior High School, Washington, D.C.] I think. Speaker 1: Okay, so you started to straighten your hair like every--like most-- Speaker 2: Yes, my mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] took me to some place, and the woman pressed my hair down. It was not what I expected, it was not what I--I did not like it initially, it was so greasy and flat but it took a couple of days to, to puff up I guess (laughter). So I did that for a while and then I started perming it or relaxing it. Speaker 1: So you permed it throughout the time you were in college? Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: What year did 'School Daze' come out? Speaker 2: 'School Daze' came out in '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: Eighty-eight [1988], so by Speaker 2: It's still permed in '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: It's still permed so--but seeing the movie did you think, oh, maybe I'll go natural. Speaker 2: No, I didn't (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But we'll talk about that when the time comes, okay. Speaker 2: Okay. No. No. Story_ID: 378983 Speaker 1: So, it's 1984 you graduate? Speaker 2: I graduate in '84 [1984] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In '84, what becomes your first professional job? Speaker 2: I got this notion in my head, so now I'm going back to writing and I got this notion in my head that if you worked in publishing (laughter) that means you could write. So, I got a job at John Wiley [John Wiley and Sons, Inc.], which is a textbook publishing company where I worked for a couple of years. Speaker 1: Doing what? Speaker 2: I was basically an administrative assistant. Speaker 1: So you worked at John Wiley in publishing for a couple of years. Speaker 2: But I, and which of course was not gonna lead to doing any writing because it just wasn't, A) it wasn't that kind of publisher and, B) it just doesn't work that way. But I was taking--I always found writing classes to take outside. Speaker 1: And you determined that you're not gonna be a writer through this vehicle so you should move on? Speaker 2: So I should keep writing on my own, so I'm writing short stories and I'm submitting them to contests and, but I'm just, I'm consistently writing. I took some classes at Frederick Douglass Center [Frederick Douglass Creative Arts Center, New York, New York] and I probably took a couple of classes there and then the semester ended, and a bunch of people that had actually been in the class decided we wanted to form our own class on our own and continue (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, where's the Frederick Douglass Center? Speaker 2: They used to be in Times Square [New York, New York] probably-- Speaker 1: And it was a writing program? Speaker 2: Primarily it was a writing program then, a fiction writing and a play writing but I think now they probably do other kinds of art and other programs. Speaker 1: So, it was the Frederick Douglass Center? Speaker 2: Yeah. So I did that and then we did this offshoot of our own where we met at a woman's apartment--we created a group called Writing without Teachers [ph.] 'cause there's a book ['Writing without Teachers,' Peter Elbow] called that and several of us from that group, from Frederick Douglass met at this woman's, this one woman's house down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] every Monday and we continued to work on our, continued to work on our work and critique each other. So, I was doing that. Speaker 1: Now, let me just step back for a second I want to add something. What productions did you do at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] that you actually acted in? Speaker 2: I only did one production--one full-out, two full-out productions. One was an original play called 'The Valedictorian' [ph.] and it was written by Shirley Knight's husband. Shirley Knight had come to teach a semester. Speaker 1: What was her husband's name? Speaker 2: I have no idea. Speaker 1: But it's called 'The Valedictorian.' Speaker 2: And we did a Shakespeare Sonnets ['Shakespeare's Sonnets,' William Shakespeare] piece. Those were like the performances I did, everything else was just scene work in class. Speaker 1: So back to Frederick Douglass, you, you're inspire- you're working with, in this center or with this group of people as a spin-off and what type of work are you creating at the time? Speaker 2: I'm creating short stories, two that I remember. I don't know how personal I wanna get (laughter). Speaker 1: You don't know how personal you wanna get? Speaker 2: One was a short story called 'The Road Not Taken' [ph.] that one's not terribly personal. It's about a woman, cause I'm in my twenties, this character is sort of I guess in her twenties or late twenties and she's had--I think she's decided, she's had a baby and decided to get married or she's gotten married and decided to have a baby. And she's kind of thinking about the life she would've had if she, had she pursued her creative path. That was that that one. And then there was another one that I wrote called 'Six Minutes' [ph.] I believe, which was about a teenage girl who gets pregnant and has an abortion and it's the six minutes that it takes to have the abortion is what the story was. So, I'm writing those, I'm sending them out to, to contests and getting rejected. I'm also trying to get in oddly enough the building where I'm at, I'm trying to get a job at Conde Nast and working at Mademoiselle or Glamour or one of those (laughter) and I can't type fast enough. That's the key to get you in the door at Conde Nast is typing at that point probably forty or fifty words a minute, and I can't pass the test. So, I cannot get in this door to save my life. I'm thinking that's my savior, Conde Nast is my savior. And I couldn't do it. Speaker 1: Now, what year did 'The Cosby Show'? Speaker 2: That's later '80s [1980s] isn't it, maybe '86 [sic. 1984]. Speaker 1: Later '86 [1986], okay. Because you'd be perfect for any role on 'The Cosby Show.' Speaker 2: But I'd given it up at that point. Story_ID: 378984 Speaker 1: It's 1985, you're writing short stories, trying to get a job at Conde Nast, what eventually becomes the job that puts you in the direction that you would, or puts you on the road? Speaker 2: Well, it's not the job, it's the experience. Nineteen eighty-six [1986] I see a movie called 'She's Gotta Have It' and here is Nola Darling who's pretty much the same age as me, she lives in Brooklyn [New York], I live in Harlem [New York, New York] at the time probably, she looks sort of like me, we could be friends. They shot this movie in Brooklyn. I see this young black guy who I don't know, although, I should. I don't know him from NYU [New York University, New York, New York] but I should. And the first time I saw it, it just changed my life. It made me really think that you could actually live in New York [New York] and make films, I had never thought that or known that before. So I saw the film at least two times maybe three. And at that point, Spike [Spike Lee] was, you know, he's a marketing genius, he's standing outside the theater [Cinema Studio, New York, New York]. Its only playing at that theater that's not even there anymore where Barnes and Nobles [Barnes and Noble Booksellers, Inc.] is on 68th Street [sic. 66th Street] I think. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Broadway. Speaker 2: Used to be whatever that theater was, that's the only theater it's playing at. Lines are around the block constantly, and he's standing outside peddling tee shirts and buttons. And so I come outside one day and there he is and I buy a tee shirt and he gives me--he doesn't have any more buttons so he gives me the button off his jacket and he's like, "Are you still at NYU?" And I'm like, "No, I graduated." I mean, I couldn't believe he still remembered me or that he did remember me. And I got it in my head, I wanna work--no, he wrote a companion book of 'She's Gotta Have It' called, maybe the book is called 'She's Gotta Have It' [sic. 'Spike Lee's Gotta Have It: Inside Guerrilla Filmmaking,' Spike Lee], and it's a journal of his experiences trying to get the film made and then getting it made, and then it's success. And at that point in 1986, it's a great guide to an independent film makers career. And I read it and I loved it, and I decided I wanna work with this guy. I'm gonna find a way to work with this guy. And I wrote him a fan letter which is kind of what was-- Speaker 1: No, go ahead you wrote him a fan letter. Speaker 2: I wrote him a fan letter, he has-- Speaker 1: What did the letter say? Speaker 2: The letter says, "I read your--I saw your movie, I read your book, you know, I just thought it was amazing. I know everybody and their mother must be coming out of the woodwork to wanna work with you and be a production assistant but I really, really would love to be a production assistant on any of your projects." And I knew he had a company in Brooklyn but I could not for the life of me find out the address for 40 Acres [40 Acres and a Mule Filmworks, Brooklyn, New York]. And somewhere in 'She's Gotta Have It,' he mentions his father's [Bill Lee] name. So I looked his father's name up in the Brooklyn phone book and I mailed the letter to him care of his father. And time passes and Spike does--'School Daze' comes out, Spike does a book-signing at a bookstore for 'School Daze' the book ['Uplift the Race: The Construction of School Daze,' Spike Lee] that goes with 'School Daze' and I went to that. And I went up to him afterwards to get him to sign my book and I said, "I wrote you a fan letter, did you get it?" And he said, "No, where'd you send it to?" "Oh, I sent it to your father's address." He said, "Where did you get my father's address?" I said, "I looked it up in the phone book." And he got this look on his face. Spike likes ingenuity in a certain way and I think he thought it was interesting that I had gone that path. He said, "I didn't get the letter, go talk to Monty [Monty Ross], he'll tell you the address of the office." So they gave me the address of the office. I resent the letter, this time with a little picture in it so he'd remember me. And maybe a month or two after sending the letter, they called me and asked me did I wanna come work on a music video. And that was sort of the--that was the beginning. Story_ID: 378985 Speaker 1: So tell me about seeing, the personal side of seeing 'She's Gotta Have It' in 19--I mean the other one that follows (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'School Daze'? Speaker 1: 'School Daze' because we--you had a story about it and I said, oh, we'll get to that. Speaker 2: I loved 'School Daze' because I didn't go to a black college [HBCU] so I didn't--like I have friends who went to a black college and they didn't like the representation of the black people in the fraternities but I didn't have that experience 'cause I didn't know that much about it. But the thing that I always remember about 'School Daze' was thinking I would call myself a, I'm a JigaBee. I'm light-skinned but I'm not light-skinned in that way, and I'm not dark-skinned so I wouldn't be technical a JigaBoo but I'm somewhere in the middle in terms of who I am and my perceptions of myself from what it is to be black. I loved the movie. At that point, Spike [Spike Lee] could do no wrong in my eyes. He was putting images on the screen that hadn't been--certainly had not been seen in years and possibly had never been seen before. And I loved that, and it made me think what kind of stories do I have that I can tell on the screen, which I had never really thought about before. Story_ID: 378986 Speaker 1: So we're gonna put two things together because two things were happening for you. You were working for Spike Lee on all of his stuff but you were also doing your own stuff at the same time. Speaker 2: Absolutely, right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So chronologically we will put those things together. So what becomes your first, what becomes your first opportunity to make your own short? Speaker 2: Well, there is, yeah, there's a lot of stuff going on. I decided I didn't--I decided I wanted to go back to school because I didn't have any film experience so my first place to go back was NYU [New York University, New York, New York], but at this point, NYU has become the hottest thing since sliced bread and I can't even get in. Speaker 1: You can't even get in? Speaker 2: I mean as an alumni, no, I don't have--'cause I have no experience. They were very snobby. I went in and I'm like, you know, trying to find out how do you get into film school. And they're like, "Oh, some of our film students have made features." And I'm thinking, this is a ringing endorsement that you got people coming (laughter) back to school who already made features. They just were not very nice to me even though I was an alumni. So I went to The New School [The New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York]. I started taking classes at The New School because I could take them at night and work during the day. So the first film I made at The New School is a non-sync seven-minute film that I wrote, directed, shot and edited 'cause that's what you do (laughter) your first year. And it's terrible. It's all on masters 'cause I didn't know anything about coverage. It's badly lit 'cause I didn't know anything about where light (laughter) should come from. It's just like where, and we shot it in my apartment so I'm like, where can I put a light stand? It's called 'Too Much Stuff' [ph.] and it's actually based on my sister and her fiance at the time. Speaker 1: But it's your first? Speaker 2: It's my absolute first (laughter), It's my absolute first. Speaker 1: And 'Too Much,' T-O-O? Speaker 2: 'Too Much Stuff.' Speaker 1: Go ahead? Speaker 2: She's about to get married and she's moving into her, husband's--her fiance, husband's apartment and their having this, Pat [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter] and her actual husband at the time are having this big argument that Pat has too much stuff which she does. And that's kind of what was the takeoff of my, my little short film. Speaker 1: And this is at The New School? Speaker 2: This is at The New School. Speaker 1: And what year was that, did you get back into school? Speaker 2: Probably, maybe '87 [1987] maybe. Speaker 1: Okay, I'm gonna be-- Speaker 2: Yeah, '87 [1987] or '88 [1988]. Speaker 1: Well, I'm quoting you on it, I mean, I'm, you know, what you say is the record so it is-- Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987] probably. Story_ID: 378987 Speaker 1: So 1987, you're back at The New School [The New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York], 'Too Much Stuff' [ph.] becomes your first short film. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, what are you doing for Spike Lee at that time? Speaker 2: With Spike, I'm just doing, I'm doing little bits of stuff. He does (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, the music video. Speaker 2: At that point he was doing music videos. Speaker 1: And who were some of the artists? The music videos? Speaker 2: E.U. [Experience Unlimited] which is a D.C. [Washington, D.C.] band who did, they did 'Doin' the Butt' [sic. 'Da Butt'] in 'School Daze,' so he did a music video for them. The first music video I did for them was a West Indian group and I cannot think of the name--the name just went right out of my head. I cannot think of the name of them, it'll come back to me. But that was the first video I did for him. Speaker 1: So they called you and said, "We have this job on a music video"-- Speaker 2: "Would you like to come work?" And I said yes immediately. I didn't know whether they were gonna pay me or anything, I just showed up and was happy as could be. And that's pretty much how I continued with my career from that point on. I was so thrilled. All of this stuff is sort of blending together; it's between '88 [1988], '89 [1989]-ish. So I did that music video it was called 'Reaching Out' [ph.] and the name of the group--I can't think of it. And then we did the E.U. video. So on the first video I'm just a straight-up production assistant. On the second video, I'm a production assistant in the wardrobe department, and he's gearing up to do 'Do the Right Thing.' And so they called me in to interview for 'Do the Right Thing,' and they want me to be an office production assistant, which I don't wanna be. I wanna be on set, I wanna be in the mix of everything so I said, "Well, I kind of wanna be on set. If I start in the office, can I go to set?" And they said, "No, we're not gonna be hiring set PAs [production assistants] for several more weeks." And I said, "Okay, thank you but I think I'm gonna wait to be a set PA," and of course, they didn't call me to be a set PA 'cause they were looking for big, burly black guys 'cause they were shooting in Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York] all summer long. So, I didn't get, I didn't get hired. I wanted to be a part of it because somehow or another I knew it was going to be groundbreaking. Speaker 1: How did you know that? Speaker 2: I guess I had heard about what the story was and what was going on at the time, the Tawana Brawley thing was going on or had just finished. There's a woman named, I believe her name is Eleanor Bumpurs, I think she was killed by the police in one of those chokeholds. So all of that kind of stuff was going on politically here and-- Speaker 1: And this is this is the summer of? Speaker 2: Eighty-nine [1989] I think. Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989]. Speaker 2: Eighty-nine [1989], yeah. So all this is going on and I know, at that point, the kind of filmmaker he is and that he's gonna be bringing these kinds of things into the shoot. So one day I actually just--I found out where they were shooting. I had made friends and I found out where they were shooting in Bed-Stuy and I just went by to visit one day just to, you know, to see what was going on and he called me over. He said, "Why you not working?" I said, "They didn't hire me." And he's like, "Oh, all right," and he left it alone. And then I decided that I really, really did wanna be a part of it and so I came and I interned a few days just to be a part of the movie. And that was crazy 'cause I was working, they were shooting, at that point, they were shooting at night so I was working, I worked my regular full-time day job in publishing, got off at five, came to work at set, at six p.m. and worked with them 'til six a.m. the next morning. Speaker 1: So when were you fitting in The New School? Speaker 2: I think I had taken a break from, I'd taken a, no, this was the summer so I'd probably taken the summer off. I think I was only going in the fall. Speaker 1: So you were still at John Wiley [John Wiley and Sons, Inc.]? Speaker 2: Yes, I was still at Wiley. Was I still at Wiley? No, I was at this other horrific publishing company (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, but you did--you were, these were just the day jobs to, to pay the rent and you were interning at night 'Do The Right Thing' (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes, yes. Speaker 1: What else came out of the experience of 'Do The Right Thing' for you? Speaker 2: The networking, I mean, all of being in film, most of being in film is about networking so I'm meeting all these people, they like me, well, Spike likes me so that's the best thing that came out of it, he liked me and he was willing to give me a shot. And, I'm meeting all these other people--a whole new world had opened up for me that I just never expected. And it's all these black people in film. It's, it's just incredible, you know, all these actors I'd never seen before, 'cause he's working with a lot of young up and coming actors, you know, a black AD [assistant director], a black DP [director of photography], I mean it was just, you know, something that was so foreign to me at that time but just so incredible. And really made me confident that I could do this myself, you know, if I wanted to. And so that was, you know, that was the best thing that was coming out of it. Story_ID: 378988 Speaker 1: What happens next for you doing your own stuff at The New School [The New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York] and then what are you doing with Spike Lee? Speaker 2: Okay, so, somewhere in there I quit my horrific publishing job and I get a part-time job, I start temping two days a week at, just through a temp agency and I'm working freelance part-time at Essence magazine, which actually is allowing me to do a tiny, tiny, tiny little bit of writing. So, it's okay, it's not great but it's, it's okay. Speaker 1: So, what was your position at Essence magazine? Speaker 2: I'm a freelance--I guess I'm a freelance editor is what I would be, as a freelance editor there. And I edited two of the columns that they did; a health-related column and a sex-related column (laughter), sexual health-related column. And I got to write a couple of little blurbs for those. Speaker 1: And what year was that? Speaker 2: That's probably, that's actually probably '89 [1989]. Speaker 1: Eighty-nine [1989], okay. Speaker 2: That is '89 [1989]. So, I'm now in my second year at-- Speaker 1: New School. Speaker 2: I'm the second year at New School and in the second year you're doing your bigger project which is a sync-sound project and I've created this script that I wanna shoot, and I'm actually really, really, excited about it. And I get a call from the production coordinator of Spike's next film, 'Mo' Better Blues,' and they want me to come in to interview for an office PA [production assistant] position again. And I'm really excited about going back to school and Essence is fine, I'm having a good old time, and in my mind I'm like, eh, I'll go interview but I don't really wanna do that. I wanna go to school and make my own films. And I get there and I'm so, for some reason I'm so like, once I get in the environment, I love the film environment. Once I get there, I'm like, I want this job and don't care that it's in the office. I wanna, I mean--once you get in the office who knows the sky is the limit. I just really wanted the job badly. So the next day the production office coordinator, one of the things she actually said to me was, "Shari [HistoryMaker Shari Carpenter], every time I hire office PAs they wanna leave me to go to set, you're not gonna leave me to go to set, are you?" And I said, "Oh, no, no." I mean, I was being serious, I wasn't planning to. So she called me the next day and she offered me the job, this is like a Friday. She's like, "I'm gonna need you to start Monday" so when she offers me the job Friday, I gotta quit Essence like immediately (laughter). So, I go into my boss I'm like, "I'm so sorry," I apologize profusely, "I need to take a leave of absence and I need to take it now." (Laughter) And so I started on 'Mo' Better Blues' on that Monday, which I guess is the fall of '89 [1989] or something. And I'm in the office and I'm having a great time, they're training me, they're teaching me, I'm working closer with the producers. It's great, and one of the jobs they asked me to do, 'cause at that point Spike always had interns on all his productions so people were constantly learning. One of my jobs was to find interns for the script supervisor. And I'm sitting on the phone out in the office and one of the producers, Preston Holmes, comes out and he says, "What are you doing?" And I said, "Oh, I'm setting up interviews for the script supervisor." And he says, "Oh, you'd be very good at that." And I didn't know what it was so I ran home, looked in my film dictionary for what it was and it sounded really interesting. And I thought, oh, I wanna do this, I wanna do this. But I had told Debbie [ph.] I wouldn't leave, so I went to her and I said, "I'm so sorry, I really, really would like to interview for this script supervisor intern, is that okay?" And she sighed heavily and she said, yes. So I met with the script supervisor and she liked me and she wanted to hire me, problem was I'm working as a PA so I'm making not a lot of money, I'm making sixty dollars a day but interns don't make anything. I'm twenty-seven, I've got a little bit of an overhead, I can't afford to work for free so I said I can't, well, I say I can't do it and then I go on a campaign to get them to let me stay on the payroll and be the intern. And Spike's like, "Nah. Interns work for free Shari, that's what it is." So I'm writing letters to him, I mean, I'm not giving up. I'm like, "Please Spike, please." He's like, "Nah." (Laughter) The whole time he's just no, no, no, no. So finally the script supervisor picks another intern and that person doesn't work out. After two weeks, she doesn't like her, she wants to fire her and they're like, "Okay, Nicki [ph.] you can fire her but you have to have an intern. You gotta pick somebody else." And she's like, "I want Shari." And so, finally, finally, finally, they agree to let me be her intern and keep my little sixty dollars a day. And that's how I got introduced to-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: --that's how I got introduced to being a script supervisor. Story_ID: 378989 Speaker 1: Continuing, we are up to script supervising on 'Mo' Better Blues.' Speaker 2: So, I love it, it allows me, I get to be on set and I get to be in the mix of everything because, I mean, I'm the intern to the script supervisor but I get to see how she works very closely with the director, the DP [director of photography], all the departments. So it's a great place for me to be. And one of the things that Spike [Spike Lee] likes is to have her notes that she makes on her script transferred into a script that he keeps. So that became sort of my day job, my job every morning I would get her script and transfer all her notes onto his script so he and I would, you know, got to talk a lot. Speaker 1: Did he know that you were at The New School [The New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York] and pursuing filmmaking yourself at the time? Speaker 2: No, not at the time, not at the time, not till later. At this point, he's got a black person in almost every key department. He's got Ernest Dickerson shooting for him, he's got Ruth Carter [Ruth E. Carter] at that point costume designing, Wynn Thomas is production designing. He's got black people in a lot of his key positions, he does not have a black script supervisor. There are actually, at that point, I think only one in the union and she wasn't interested in working with him (laughter). So, I think he really liked the fact that I was interested in it and so they started to sort of groom me to do it, his producers. So right after doing that I just, I mean, I really fell in love with it and so I started to figure, you know, find ways to do it. I started interning with other people, I did a, I did a music video as a script supervisor, I did a friend's short film, I did a series of commercials just to get my feet wet. And then a producer that works with Spike a lot, Preston Holmes, did this film 'New Jack City' and they created a position for me to be the, to be the paid assistant of the script supervisor on that. So I got to work with another script supervisor, so I'm getting more training. And they're doing something they're not supposed to do, which is shooting some second unit stuff without actually bringing in another script supervisor, so she would send me so somebody would be there. So I'm really getting a lot of on the job training. And she's great, I love her. Speaker 1: Now, did you have to join the union? Did you become-- Speaker 2: At that particular point, I didn't but what was happening in terms of the unions at that point is there was NABET [National Association of Broadcast Employees and Technicians; National Association of Broadcast Employees and Technicians-Communications Workers of America (NABET-CWA)] and then there was IA [International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, Moving Picture Technicians, Artists and Allied Crafts of the United States, Its Territories and Canada (IATSE)]. And there was all this talk in the air of NABET and IA merging. And so, Nini [Cornelia "Nini" Rogan] who was my script supervisor on that, Nini Rogan, on 'New Jack City' said you should join NABET now 'cause they're gonna merge with IA and it's gonna be much more difficult. So I did join toward the end of that movie. She wrote a letter of recommendation for me. Speaker 1: So you became like one of a handful of black script supervisors. There's only you and then the woman who didn't take the Spike Lee job? Speaker 2: Renoir. Speaker 1: What's her name? Speaker 2: Renoir Darrett I believe is her name. She did 'Married to The Mob,' she did big white films. She didn't need this little black guy. Speaker 1: Okay, so, then there are very few black script supervisors (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that point, I think there really were the only two of us. Speaker 1: Only two, so you became the second? Speaker 2: Yeah, on the East Coast, on the East Coast. I don't know about the West Coast so much. But at that, you know, at that point I'm just trying to work and create a career in the film industry so I'm not even that really that aware. And at that point, a lot of black film is starting to happen, you know, 'Boyz n the Hood' is gonna come very soon after that. Speaker 1: 'Juice.' Speaker 2: 'Juice,' which I did. Speaker 1: There's (unclear), what was his name? Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah, 'Straight Out of Brooklyn.' Speaker 1: 'Straight Out of Brooklyn.' Speaker 2: 'Straight Out of Brooklyn,' you know, so black filmmakers are starting to crop up. So I do 'New Jack City,' I get into, I join NABET and the next film that Spike is actually about to do is 'Jungle Fever.' Story_ID: 378990 Speaker 1: We're talking about like the technical aspects, what you're doing, you know, for 'New Jack City' but I want you to comment on the images that are being portrayed of black people and movies at this time. What you feel about it, you're the script supervisor, you're on set every day? Speaker 2: 'New Jack City,' I was, I don't know, I was not impressed with 'New Jack City.' Speaker 1: But it did extremely well at the box office. Speaker 2: It did very, very well (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I still watch it when it comes on now (laughter). Chris Rock. Speaker 2: Yeah, Chris Rock, Wesley [Wesley Snipes]. Speaker 1: Wesley, yeah. Speaker 2: It just, certain people, certain filmmakers it seems like movies are their experience. For example, and I don't know John Singleton very well, we've met a few times. 'Boyz n the Hood' seemed like John's personal experience. 'New Jack City' in my humble opinion is not Mario Van Peebles' experience. So it was just very affected in a kind of way is how it seemed. But, also, it's like I can't answer this question completely objectively because now so many other films have come on the heels of it. At the time, it probably didn't seem quite as bad to me as it does now, but back then it seemed like it was glorifying a lifestyle that, that I don't necessarily feel like needed to be glorified, you know, this whole gangster, shoot 'em up kind of thing. And because there were very few films, if any, that were coming out to balance that, those images, I didn't necessarily think it was the best thing in the world. It was, that film actually wasn't as hard to work on as a couple of other ones, 'cause I've done a few in that vein. Speaker 1: What were the ones that were hard to work on? Speaker 2: 'Strapped' was kind of hard to work on. Speaker 1: Which one is that? Speaker 2: It's a film that Forest Whitaker directed for HBO probably a few years later--actually not even, maybe two years later. It's just sort of hard when you find these people who are directing movies that really aren't their experience so it's very, it sometimes glamorizing certain things. It can be very difficult; it can be tremendously difficult. 'New Jack' was, 'New Jack' was a mixed bag for me because I didn't actually like the story and I didn't like that it was glorifying the lifestyle that it was glorifying. But on the flipside, I'm meeting all these great people, I'm making all these connections, I'm actually learning a skill that actually can create a career for me in this industry that I had no idea that I was interested in being in. So it had those advantages to it. Story_ID: 378991 Speaker 1: And you are at this point one of the first African American script supervisors in the industry who is legitimately a part of the union [National Association of Broadcast Employees and Technicians; National Association of Broadcast Employees and Technicians-Communications Workers of America (NABET-CWA)] and working, and can work on any, any film. You got the skill down (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pretty much, yeah. I'm learning the skill; I don't have it down but I'm learning. Speaker 1: When do you, so when do you get back to New School [The New School for Social Research; The New School, New York, New York] to work to create your own work? Speaker 2: I don't go back to The New School. That was '91 [1991], I don't go back to The New School 'til '92 [1992]. And when I go back to The New School, I actually go back, I go back as a work-study. Because at this point now I've worked in film enough. On my own, I have a much better sense of how to put things together. I've been script supervising, you know, at that point a couple of, two, three, four, maybe, big films on my own. And the main reason I go back to The New School is 'cause I want a certain caliber of actors and if you're affiliated with a college you can get SAG [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] actors, and that's why I actually went back. I was originally gonna do my second film on my own and my casting person said, "Well, if you could be affiliated with a school, we could get SAG actors and we don't have to pay 'em that much." And I was like, oh, okay. And I went back to The New School and I said, can I do a work-study, and they said, yes. And they offered me equipment which I actually didn't need 'cause I was renting equipment but that was the reason that I went back. Speaker 1: In the second film, where did you get the money to, for the budget? Speaker 2: I raised the money, I raised the money for the second film. Okay, so let me tell you in terms of working where I am from now. So, I do, I did 'New Jack City,' I do 'Jungle Fever,' I do 'Malcolm X.' Speaker 1: Okay, well, we'll come back and talk about those but--the experience of working on those. Speaker 2: So, what happened was I had written the script for--my second film is called 'Since Lisa' and I had written the script for it and I was trying to get grant money. So, I'm applying for all these grants and I'm getting rejected, I'm getting rejected, I'm getting rejected. And so finally I realize I'm gonna have to foot the bill myself. And so what I start doing is every film I work on half my paycheck goes into a special account for me to make this film. So, the end of the day I have a huge chunk of change sitting in the bank and I'm like, and you're gonna make a short film. You could buy a car, you could put a down payment on a house, and you're gonna make a short film. (Laughter) That's when I knew I was a filmmaker. So, in February of 1992 for ten days we shoot 'Since Lisa' and I use all the friends that I have now made, you know, on these other movies that I've been working with (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who's the DP [director of photography] on that one? Speaker 2: A gentleman named Henry Ottobonajo [ph.]. Speaker 1: Now, did you do it in the Spike Lee's vein whereas everyone was black in and around the set? Speaker 2: Pretty much, yeah, yeah. It's definitely a black story, four-character piece, shot, most of it in my apartment I think but in friends' apartments. But, yeah, all black crew or mostly black crew, everybody donated their time. It was very slow at that point in the film industry so people had the time to do it, and it was, we had a great, great time. And, I mean you know, (laughter) you look back on it, certainly it's infinitely better than 'Too Much Stuff' [ph.] (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Than 'Too Much Stuff' [ph.], okay. Story_ID: 378992 Speaker 1: It was infinitely better (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So 'Since Lisa' becomes the second? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: But in between that you have 'Jungle Fever,' which was dedicated to, who was the kid who was killed, who was dating the white girl that was out someplace and at the top of the film they say this film is, or even maybe at the end, at the end of the film? Speaker 1: Oh, my gosh, I can't remember, I can't remember. Speaker 2: But I can see his face, the kid's face. Speaker 1: Okay, I can't remember to be perfectly honest. Speaker 2: Hawkins, Yusef. Speaker 1: Oh, right, right, right, Yusef Hawkins. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The interesting, one of the interesting things--two interesting things about 'Jungle Fever.' I had just come off 'New Jack City' as the assistant script supervisor and so 'New Jack City,' I mean, 'Jungle Fever' is maybe two or three months after that. And they call me in, they're like, "Shari [HistoryMaker Shari Carpenter], you're gonna be the assistant script supervisor. Who would you recommend to be the script supervisor?" So I'm recommending these women that I've worked with that I've had a great time with and so that's like on a Wednesday. And I get hired on the job and in my mind I'm thinking, how interesting is it that I'm hired before my boss is hired, and I'm recommending who I think my boss should be. And the next day I get a call from Spike [Spike Lee] and he's like, "Shari, this is Spike, you gonna script supervise 'Jungle Fever' or you're not gonna work on it at all." And I'm like, what? I'm like totally panic-stricken 'cause I'm all happy about being the assistant (laughter) and you just, this is kind of quintessential Spike. He throws you into the deep end of the pool and if you stay afloat, you generally can keep going from there. If you sink, too bad on you. So, he tells, I burst into tears when he tells me this I'm thinking to myself, no, no, I'm not ready, I'm not ready. And he's like, "That's what you gonna do." And he hangs up on me. So, I call his producers and I'm like, "Spike wants me to do this." And they're like, "Don't worry, Shari, we'll set you up." So they set me up beautifully. They gave me two weeks of prep which is very unusual for a script supervisor, you usually only get a week. They give me two weeks of prep. They-- Speaker 2: What is a supervisor prep when, when you're in prep? Speaker 1: Prepping, you're doing a series of breakdowns or forms that many of them get distributed to other departments. A lot of it is just about your own preparation and getting to know the script backwards and forwards, inside and out for when you start shooting. Speaker 2: So they gave you two weeks to prep (simultaneous)? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They gave me two weeks. And they allowed me to pick a script supervisor (laughter) to train me. They paid someone to train me for a weekend. So I hired my friend Robin [ph.] who had been very, very good to me and she was like, "You know, you know how to do this Shari." I mean, I have had--I got more training on being a script supervisor than most people do without getting--before they get thrown in. So she was like, "Don't worry about it. This is the paperwork, these are the kinds of things you need to look for when you're on set, you know, this is how it goes. Just don't worry, you know it, don't worry about it." So, it was--I was probably better prepared for that job than any job I've ever been--that I've had since 'cause I was terrified every day. Speaker 2: And how well did you do that job? Speaker 1: I must of done it well 'cause he kept hiring me. I did--I made mistakes, I mean, I still make mistakes but I made mistakes. I, I, (laughter) see my mistakes. I remember-- Speaker 2: Do you see your mistakes in the film? Speaker 1: Probably less in the film, but at that point in time what Spike used to do is you'd go to dailies after you shot. At night you'd go to dailies, and you'd sit there, and it was so interesting 'cause everybody's cringing from their own point of view. I'm cringing from continuity problems; the first AC [assistant camera] is cringing 'cause something is soft. You know, the wardrobe departments like, "Oh, my God, that's not the shirt he was supposed to be wearing." Everybody's cringing from their own department. But I remember the first night I went to dailies. We had shot a scene with Lonette McKee and she was on a stoop and she had turned one way in one shot and she turned another way at another angle. And I got up and I ran to the back and I was like, "Oh, my God, Spike I messed up, I messed up. She turned the wrong way." And Spike said, "Shari, go sit back down." 'Cause, I mean, he knew he could cut this thing together every, you know, six ways to Tuesday and I'm panicking about these minute things. But, it was good for me to do it. It was very stressful 'cause I really was afraid every day that I was gonna make some massive mistake, but it was fine. It was fine. Story_ID: 378993 Speaker 1: And then you get the big job-- Speaker 2: I get the big job (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of his movies and that's 'Malcolm X'? Speaker 2: Yes, the momma of all mommas, yes, yes. Speaker 1: And that shoot, how long did you shoot that one for? Speaker 2: We shot about fourteen weeks in the states and then they went to Africa for a few weeks for a shot. Speaker 1: Did you travel with them to? Speaker 2: I did not, no. I was supposed to but money gets short towards the end of a shoot (laughter), so, no I didn't get to go. Speaker 1: All right, let's pause for a second. Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Continuing. The mother of all script-supervising jobs, 'Malcolm X.' Speaker 2: At that point, yes. Speaker 1: It was Spike Lee's biggest budget to date, still? On one of his productions--well, maybe not just because (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, 'Inside Man' usurped it. It was his biggest budget to date. It was his biggest film to date. He's taking on a real person, it's a job that he's had some conflict over because it was originally supposed to be directed by a white director. I can't remember who. I wanna say Barry Levinson but I don't that's right. So, he's made some (laughter), as he's famous for doing or has been famous for doing in the past, has made some remarks about this director not being the right director. And then there've been people some black and some white, who don't think that Spike's the right director because he's done all these other films that they perceive is very in-your-face and confrontational I think. So, we're all very excited but we're all I guess wary to a certain degree. Because it was such a big job, they gave me two weeks to prep that. But when it, had I known it was gonna be the job that it was, I would've asked for three weeks or a month because a lot of what ended up happening in the prep for that job was working with the researcher. Because there were things, there were factual inaccuracies in the script and I just thought this is a real person's life, there's no reason to have factual inaccuracies when we can go back to the book, we can look up these things. So, I mean, I would sometimes be up on the phone 'til two o'clock in the morning talking to the researcher because it's just, you know, we don't have any room for error on this film. So we did a lot of that. And, at least one other person besides myself--I think the production designer, we just felt like we're not quite ready yet. I think we were supposed to start shooting on a Wednesday, and I've never done this before and I've never done it since but I actually went to him and I said, "Spike, we're really not ready. Can't we just push a couple of days? We're just, we're just really--we need to do this right. People are looking at you and we're just not ready." And he is, he's Spike and he was like, "Thank you, no, we're going on Wednesday." And that's what we did. Story_ID: 378994 Speaker 1: Because you've had an opportunity to work with him [Spike Lee] a lot, how would you describe your relationship with him? Speaker 2: Well, the fact that I keep getting hired (laughter) is a good sign (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, it's a good working relationship. Speaker 2: It isn't always a good work--it's not always a good working relationship. Because depending on how you approach your work as a script supervisor, you can be perceived very negatively because often what you're saying is, there's a problem I need to bring to your attention, a problem. It has definitely gotten much, much, much better over time. Where we are now is light years away from where we were then. He liked me but I don't necessarily feel like we had a whole lot of real interaction in those early films. You know, I was there to do my job. He can be, he can be playful sometimes, so every now and again he'll be playful but I don't necessarily feel like he looked to me to offer--advice might not be the right word or-- Speaker 1: Well, let me ask this. You were a budding filmmaker; did he mentor you in any way? Speaker 2: (Shakes head). Speaker 1: Who was your mentor then, who did you look to, to become like Spike Lee and John Singleton, and were there any female black directors at the time that you perhaps looked up to? I know there is one because she made that great film with Sam Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson] and-- Speaker 2: Oh, Kasi, Kasi Lemmons? Speaker 1: Is that her name? What's the name of that film before you go on? Speaker 2: 'Eve's Bayou.' Speaker 1: 'Eve's Bayou,' yeah. Speaker 2: 'Eve's Bayou' is a little bit later down the line. At the--sort of in the timeframe we're looking at, who's out there really is [HistoryMaker] Julie Dash for 'Daughters of the Dust,' which is a beautiful film very, very different from anything that I would wanna do but it's great that she's out there. And at that point, she's getting a lot of recognition. To a little--to a much lesser degree there was also a black woman filmmaker named [HistoryMaker] Ayoka Chenzira who was doing some stuff. Speaker 1: Did she do 'Sankofa'? Speaker 2: No, that's a guy. Haile Gerima did 'Sankofa.' And because I've now done 'Since Lisa' and it's finally--this is actually a little bit later, when it finally get's finished, it goes out onto the festival circuit so--and it goes out onto the black festival circuit so I meet some up and coming black women directors. But at that point, there really is no one. Spike is not--it's not that at that point, that he's not a mentor, that's not--I'm not being fair to him. When I finished 'Since Lisa,' he asked me could he see it, and he watched it, and I think he like it well enough. And I think he asked me if I had a feature script written, and at that point, I didn't. Maybe if I had, maybe he would've, you know, come on board to help me get it done. Although the thing, the thing that I think about Spike sometimes is that, in some ways he's a filmmaker who's constantly trying to keep his own career going, that he sometimes doesn't, he comes on board once something has already been established. For example, this is much later down the line but 'Love and Basketball,' Gina Prince-Bythewood's film, he produced but that film has already gone through the Sundance [Sundance Film Festival] labs. It's not like he discovered Gina, he discovered somebody who had already been discovered by somebody else and he got on board. He is not quite so much out there looking for the new talent 'cause he's looking to do his own stuff. When we did 'Malcolm X,' we, I mean, I gave opinions. I'm an opinionated person and we have developed enough of a relationship at that point that I can voice opinions. I think the fact that I had the courage to say to him, 'I think we need to push 'cause we're not ready,' allowed him to see how committed I actually am to his project and to the good of the whole project. So, sometimes he would do things that weren't, that he would take liberties and sometimes I would be very adamant about thinking--telling him I don't think you should take this liberty. It's not, it's not right. And he would most times brush me off or sometimes he would take in what I said. He does--he gave me a lot of space to say what I needed to say, I probably just didn't say as much then as I do now. And now he gives me a lot more latitude. It was a great job, though. It was a really, really great job. I think we--there were some--we shot in Harlem [New York, New York]--outside in Harlem a couple of days and that was a little--that had moments of being contentious because there were people out there who were thrilled to see us and be around us. And there were some people that really were adamantly opposed to him being the one doing this film and they were vocally screaming in the background when we were trying to shoot stuff. And then as he, I don't know if you know, he talks about, you know, when the studio [Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc.], which is on my resume 'cause I don't remember who backed that, said you have X amount of money and when they ran out of X amount of money, they shut the film down which was before they went to Africa but after we finished principle photography. So, you know Speaker 1: Didn't he call Bill Cosby? Speaker 2: He called all his wealthy friends, Tracy Chapman, Michael Jordan. He tells actually a very funny story on 'Actors Studio' ['Inside the Actors Studio'] that he calls I think and asked him for money and then he calls maybe Magic Johnson, and he tells Magic how much Michael's giving so Magic will up the price or something like that. It was actually on--'Inside the Actors Studio' was one of the most powerful things I've ever seen. I'd know him for years at that point, and he talks about getting the money to finish the film and he starts crying--just tears running down his face. He doesn't wipe them away or stop what he's saying and I've known Spike all these years and I'd never seen him cry before. And I was watching TV and blown away by it. Story_ID: 378995 Speaker 1: Back to your career, 'Since Lisa' does well on the festival circuit (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It does well on the festival circuit. Prim- on, at that point, exclusively black festival circuit. I don't know, I'm still, I'm in this weird-- Speaker 1: Now, go ahead, you're in this weird but-- Speaker 2: I'm in this weird kind of no man's land, which I'm still a little bit in, which is I have a career that is a very mainstream film career but I'm trying to do things that I'm--for myself in a more independent way. So I'm trying to navigate these two roads. So, at that point, I didn't know a lot about film festivals, so you know, I primarily submitted 'Since Lisa' to black film festivals and particularly black women film festivals, and it did well. Speaker 1: And, I wanna know which ones you submitted it to, like flush out that arena for me so that people know fifty years from now what, you know, the black film festival circuit? Speaker 2: Gosh, I guess what it would be called--I think what it would be called now is the Hollywood Film Festival, the Black Hollywood Film Festival [sic. Hollywood Black Film Festival], where it won actually second-place award. There's an African American Women in Film festival [African American Women In Cinema Film Festival] that they do up at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] every year. It actually--there are a couple of mainstream film festivals that it went to now that--it went to Seattle Film Festival [Seattle International Film Festival] actually. Went to Rochester [Rochester International Film Festival] for some reason (laughter) (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did it go to Denver [Denver Pan African Film Festival]? Speaker 2: It didn't go to Denver. I didn't send it to a whole, whole lot of places because at that point what I had hoped for, which I think everybody hopes with their short is that it's gonna be a calling card to a feature. And sometimes they are and sometimes they're not. Speaker 1: Did you do the Acapulco one? Speaker 2: This was pre-Acapulco Film Festival [Acapulco Black Film Festival; American Black Film Festival] at that time. So it did well for what--it didn't do as well as I had hoped it would do but it did well for what it was. And at that point it there was actually a black film company called KGM Distribution [ph.] that distributed black--short black films, black shorts and they picked it up for distribution for a couple of years and so it went off on whatever they did and it made a little money, I don't know five hundred bucks [dollars] or something. It didn't make anywhere near what it cost me to produce it but-- Speaker 1: What did it cost to produce it? Speaker 2: Cost about thirty thousand [dollars] to produce it, yeah. I mean we shot on sixty-millimeter films, we shot for ten days. It was, it was-- Speaker 1: It was a real production. Speaker 2: It was a real production. 'Cause at that point I had worked on real productions and I wanted to treat my crew well. I didn't wanna work sixteen, eighteen hour days for four days. I'd rather work twelve hour days for ten, so that's what we did. Story_ID: 378996 Speaker 1: After 'Since Lisa,' your next professional break in your own work comes, is it in 2002? Speaker 2: In my own work? Let's see, in 1995 I wrote a script called 'Kali's Vibe' and it did well for me, I eventually shot it in 1999. But there used to be down at Nuyorican Poets Cafe [New York, New York], they used to do a screenplay reading series called, I believe, First Tuesdays [ph.]. And they would bring in--they would have a script reading, they would bring in professional actors and they would bring in a lot of independent New York [New York] film industry folks to come in and listen and possibly get attached. And that's sort of what happened for 'Kali's Vibe' for a little while. There was a company called Seneca Falls [Seneca Falls Productions], two white women producers [Kelley Forsyth and Sarah Vogel] who were interested and for a year we tried to get this (laughter) film off the ground with varying degrees of success. I mean, one of the things I think that I was influenced by then and I probably still am to some degree was what Spike [Spike Lee] had done, which was to find all these new black actors to work. And I always liked that and that's what I had originally envisioned 'Kali's Vibe' being, an opportunity to find new actors and give them jobs. But then when I got with these producers of course they're trying to, you know, raise money so then we-- Speaker 1: They're attaching names. Speaker 2: That's what they wanna do. So, at one point we're having conversations, we find, we get connected to ICSM [ph.], the independent arm of ICM [ICM Partners] in California, and they have connections to Janet Jackson, Jada Pinkett [Jada Pinkett Smith], and someone else who's, Halle Berry. This is in the mid-'90s [1990s] before all these women are, Halle hasn't won an Academy Award [Oscar] yet so she's kind of trying make her way. So they're like, "Okay, Shari [HistoryMaker Shari Carpenter], well, this is how it goes. You can't approach all three of them at the same, you have to approach one at a time. So who's your favorite?" And I'm thinking, none of them (laughter), but I have to decide who do I want them to take my script to. And my script has a lesbian bent to it, so now we've got black actresses who are not notoriously great at wanting to do gay subject matter. And these are big name women who are not necessarily gonna wanna do gay subject matter. It was just--it was exciting for a minute because it looked like, okay, if one of these people says, yes, this movie will go. But it didn't work out and it was a lot of back and forth like that. At one point I saw an article about Lisa Bonet in a magazine and she was heavy into yoga and she looked beautiful and she had these long locks. She looked very much like my main character so I wanted to go after her. Well, Lisa Bonet wants to do bigger films, she doesn't wanna be the lead in independent films. She wants to be a supporting actress in a Will Smith film. MC Lyte wanted to be an actress so we went with her for a while. It just was all this back and forth of going with names and ultimately what we ended up doing was what I had originally wanted, was very grassroots, you know, penny-pinching here and there and everywhere and a crop of young actors from New York who were wonderful but it was a very, very crazy shoot. So-- Speaker 1: But that film is the one that then went to Denver? Speaker 2: That film has gone all over the world. Speaker 1: But it's received a certain number of-- Speaker 2: It won awards at Denver Pan African Film Festival, it won the Audience Award and the Jury Award at Denver Pan African, it won a Vision Award at the Los Angeles [California] Pan African [Pan African Film and Arts Festival]. It was under consideration for an Independent Spirit Award but I think the downside--the reason it didn't get an Independent Spirit Award nomination is because the films have to be theatrically release and it was not theatrically released. Yeah, I got some grant money for that, I mean, it's been certainly the most successful thing I've done. Speaker 1: And you've made how many? Speaker 2: I've made two features and four or five shorts. Story_ID: 378997 Speaker 1: We're gonna switch gears a little bit and talk about the community that exists amongst black female directors or black women directors, sorry, or African American women directors I guess (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, black women is fine. Speaker 1: Who do you, who else do you see in your world doing what you're doing? Speaker 2: On a day-to-day basis very few people. If I moved to California, I might see more. Speaker 1: Is that, is that a possibility? Speaker 2: I would prefer not to have to do it. I prefer not to have to do it, I would certainly prefer not to have to do it in this stage of my career that I'm in right now which is I am an aspiring director for all intents and purposes. So I would just be going out there to knock on doors with all the other people who are already out there. If I got a project to go out there that would be the ideal way to go. Speaker 1: But you consider yourself still aspiring and you've made a total of almost six or seven films? Speaker 2: Uh-huh, I do. Speaker 1: What would make you a bona fide director? Speaker 2: (Laughter) I guess if, it changes, I guess there was a point when I thought if I got a film, if I got to direct a film that was theatrically distributed that would make me more bona fide. And it--and on some level that hasn't changed. But also now because the industry is changing so much and it's so difficult to get a film distributed theatrically, to do television or to do a cable movie now. Speaker 1: Because of costs? Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. And also I just see sort of my black male counterparts if they, almost across the board if they do a first feature no matter how good or bad it is, if it gets theatrical distribution they get an opportunity to do another film. That isn't quite the case. Speaker 1: So, let's just pause for one second. Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Did I say this on-camera that the black, you know, the black male counterparts-- Speaker 2: You do one not-so-good film and there's an opportunity (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, if you're lucky you do one good one (laughter), if you're lucky. And maybe you do one that's not so great but you seemed to get an opportunity as a black man to do another one. I think we were talking about it not too long ago. I think Cheryl Dunye, whose first film was 'Watermelon Woman' ['The Watermelon Woman'], her second film was an HBO film called 'Stranger Inside,' and her third film was theatrical called 'Baby's Daddy' ['My Baby's Daddy'] or something like that. I think Cheryl is the first black woman to do sort of three majorly seen films. I mean, you might not have heard of her, you might of heard more of Kasi Lemmons with 'Eve's Bayou' and 'Caveman's Valentine' ['The Caveman's Valentine'] but Cheryl I think is or was the more working director. But I think even now, she's teaching. Speaker 2: But what about as far as directing commercials even or are there any African American women behind the scenes, commercials or television sitcoms? Speaker 1: The problem is, there may be some black women commercial directors. The problem that I find is that you have to, you sort of can't do it all, you kind of have to decide what path you wanna go down and then you pour all your energy into that path to create the opportunities. So if I decided I wanted to do commercials, I'd have to put, you know, filmmaking on the backburner and just throw all my energy into that. You mentioned Sanaa [Sanaa Hamri] who did the Sanaa Lathan, which I can't think of the name of it, it came out last year where she's involved with a white guy. Sanaa came from music video directing. Speaker 2: 'Something New.' Speaker 1: Yes, Sanaa came from music video directing. So, I mean, a lot of directors started music videos and translated into film. But then again for me that would be, okay, now I gotta put all my energy into creating opportunities in music videos, which I don't have already, to try and get back to this thing that I do have a strong background in-- Story_ID: 378998 Speaker 1: Who do you get advice from on career issues? Speaker 2: Oddly enough, you asked me about a mentor. I have two mentors both two white people. A white filmmaker named Jim McKay and a white woman producer named Sarah Green and I got a fellowship through the Independent Feature Project [sic. Independent Filmmaker Project] back in 2001 and both Jim and Sarah became my mentors through that project. Speaker 1: Sarah's a producer, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, Sarah's a producer. Speaker 1: I worked with her. She did like, I can't remember which film but maybe 'American Buffalo.' Speaker 2: Maybe. She used to work with John Sayles a lot and then she broke off and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And John Sayles I think may have done 'American Buffalo' [sic.] or-- Speaker 2: Oh, maybe so. Well, I guess people would know her now most, she's most famous right now for 'Frida.' She did the Frida Kahlo movie with Julie Taymor and Salma Hayek. And Sarah and Jim have been two of my greatest mentors. Speaker 1: But those are two good people to have on your team, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes, I mean, I'm (laughter) It's just, it's interesting and sometimes a little frustrating that I would like my mentors to be black people. Speaker 1: What do you think would change if your mentors--what would be the difference in having a black mentor? Speaker 2: Actually, I shouldn't even say it like that. I shouldn't say a black mentor. On my bad days, who I want to be my mentor is Spike [Spike Lee] (laughter), that's who I would want. It seems to make the most sense. But you don't want a mentor where you have to twist their arm or force them to do something that's not what they wanna do or that's not natural to them. And he is, in my mind, Spike is giving me--he's, in my mind and his mind, he's given me so much. Every time there is a job, he calls--I get first refusal on every job he does as long as he shoots on the East Coast. Now, when he shoots in California it's a different story. But I get first refusal on every job. And I'm sure he's like, what are you complaining about (laughter)? Speaker 1: Right, right. Story_ID: 378999 Speaker 1: And then I'm assuming by osmosis that, I mean, being there you can learn a lot-- Speaker 2: Absolutely (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) from him [Spike Lee]. Now have you learned any technical aspects of what you do from him? Speaker 2: The ironic thing I've discovered is I actually probably, the first film--I did a film in 1992 called 'The Saint of Fort Washington,' which was the first film I did away from the Spike Lee camp. I refer to it as a white film because it was directed by a white man, Tim Hunter. Starred [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover and Matt Dillon, so it was my first white film. I actually learned more doing that film than I had working with Spike and Ernest [Ernest Dickerson]. (Background noise) Oh, boo. Speaker 1: Fort Washington or was it Saint Washington? Speaker 2: 'The Fort of Saint Washington'--'The Saint of Fort Washington,' 'The Saint of Fort Washington' is the name of the film. Danny Glover plays a homeless--Danny Glover and Matt Damon [sic.] play homeless men. It was the best job because prior to that I had worked with Spike who's a very--who's a director who is very clear about what he wants. It may be unconventional but he knows what he wants. He's used to working with Ernest Dickerson, they had worked together on all his films up to that point--which I think is up to 'Malcolm X,' I guess we're at, and had worked together at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] as well. So they had a lot more experience than I had and so they didn't ask me the kinds of questions that a less experienced director would ask of me. And Tim Hunter started to ask me questions about screen direction and crossing the line, and what angles we should shoot from so it forced me to work and learn things that I didn't necessarily, to flex muscles that I had but I didn't necessarily--hadn't necessarily been using up to that point. So that actually was a difficult job but it was one of the best jobs I had because it forced me to work in a new way. And it certainly, it's certainly a way that I continue to work now. And I work with a lot of first-time directors so it's questions that come up, you know, all the time. They're rehearsing a scene and they don't necessarily--they have an idea of about how they wanna shoot it but they're really not getting all the coverage they need so that it will cut well later. And so that job, 'The Saint of Fort Washington' sort of trained me. And also it has made me a better director 'cause I know now--I now know things that I didn't before. Story_ID: 379000 Speaker 1: So, working with Spike [Spike Lee]--people think that 'Kali's Vibe' is similar to 'She's Gotta Have It' and I don't think that, that's a bad comparison. I think it has a very similar kind of energy, it's raw in the same kind of way. But he has certain--he has a certain style that I'm not--that's not for me. I'm much more story driven. I'm much more conventional in my directing of the film in terms of how it's shot because I'm driven by the fact that I'm a writer by nature, and so I'm much more interested in the story than I am in camera tricks and, you know, dolly in and zoom out or whatever, you know, that kind of stuff. Jim [Jim McKay] has been a great mentor for me because Jim is very interested in small stories about real people told in a very real way. So we are very compatible in that way. He had done a film called--how can I not remember the name of this film. Good grief. I should be ashamed of myself. He did a film called 'Girls Town' and he did another film which was about three young black and Latino women ['Our Song'], and the name will come to me as I talk about it. Actually, let me talk about 'Girls Town.' What he had done with 'Girls Town' is he had gotten together a group of actors, all women, and they did improvisational scenes and he would record them on tape and then he based the scene on the improvisations. And I thought that was very interesting. So he came to speak at an organization that I'm a member of and I asked him about that technique. And he said, "Oh, you know, I'll tell you a little bit about it." And he talked about it a little bit and then he said to me afterwards, "If you're interested, 'cause I don't know if everybody in the room is interested in that, that's something we can talk about one on one." And he said, "Give me a call in a couple of weeks or something." And, you know, people say that kind of stuff all the time but, actually, in a couple of weeks, he called me. And he was like, "You still wanna talk about 'Girls Town'? I'm doing another film that's in a similar kind of style, maybe you would wanna come and work with me on that film." And I was like, yeah, great. He extended himself in a way that a lot of people really, really don't and that relationship started in 2001 and has continued to this day. He is a working filmmaker; he's starting to do a little bit of television now himself. He recommends me for jobs, we talk about projects that I'm working on. He's always like, "So, Shari [HistoryMaker Shari Carpenter], how's that project that you were working on going?" He knows much more about my life away from script supervising, which I have made a conscious effort to keep those lines very clear. I don't want him to see me as a script supervisor, I want him to see me as a filmmaker and that's how he relates to me. And, Sarah [Sarah Green], in a very similar kind of way, she knows that I supervise but she also knows I'm a filmmaker and she tries to do projects with me or, you know, give me, you know, recommend me for things. They've been great in that way. Other people a little less so. Story_ID: 379001 Speaker 1: What was the experience, and you said 'Inside Man' was the bigger budget even than 'Malcolm X' (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Malcolm X,' I think so. Speaker 1: Does the intensity grow because there's more money involved? Speaker 2: Not for me (laughter) 'cause I get paid the same thing no matter how big the budget is. Spike [Spike Lee] was really, really excited to do the film so his excitement can fuel a lot of people. There was, I guess there's a degree of--some degree of pressure 'cause he's doing a big studio film, it's being produced by Brian Grazer. It's a huge film for him, it's his first real, real studio film. But he's, you know, he's surrounded with the crew that he knows and loves. He's working with Denzel [Denzel Washington], who he's worked with now three or four times. And Denzel is great with Spike, they have a wonderful relationship and they're funny. He had a great time. It's a--I mean, you've seen the movie? Speaker 1: No, I haven't. Speaker 2: Okay. It's a very complicated script. Speaker 1: I hear it's complicated, I'm gonna On Demand it and I will do it this evening. Speaker 2: It's a complicated script so that had a lot to do with it. But at this--I don't know what changed for Spike 'cause I think I'm always been the same. Somewhere in the making of 'Inside Man' he started to trust me in a way that I feel like he hadn't before, so he asked my opinion on so many things and he gave me a lot of power in his own way (laughter). And it was great. And that has been the way it's been since then. I mean, we did that a year--almost two years ago. It's been the same way. I guess he now has gotten, if I say I'm gonna work on your film, I'm there a hundred percent. I'm not just (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're gonna work on it. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm gonna do it, and I'm gonna do it to the best of my ability. Story_ID: 379002 Speaker 1: You've stayed active as a writer by participating in the ABC Writers [ABC Writers Development Program], was is it? Speaker 2: Development Program (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Development Program. Probably one of the few African Americans that are in that program? Speaker 2: Oddly enough, there were three of us the year that I did it. There were ten total and there were--which I guess was 2002 or 2003, there were three of us, three women. But, yeah, it's probably not a lot of us that get to do it. But, no, I'm always writing. I'm always trying to think of--I write short films that I can shoot. I bought a video camera so I can actually constantly be shooting. Every year I wanna be producing something of my own in hopes that they'll get bigger and bigger every year. Speaker 1: And is that what you've set out to do thus far is to create one project a year? Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 379003 Speaker 1: What is it you wanna be remembered for? And I'm specifically talking about your work, you wanna create a body of work that does what? You know how August Wilson says he wanted a piece for every decade. What is it about your work that you want to present or be remembered for? And we'll pause for just a second, let you think about it. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Rolling. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: I wanna be, I wanna be remembered for recording black images, primarily black women's images, and in a dignified but not reverential kind of way. I think there are a lot of movies out there where black women, not intentionally necessarily, but are almost made to be comic figures. And I'm not really interested in promoting that. Or I guess even just being egotistical enough to think that my particular experience as a black woman is not so unique that other people, other black women, other black men, other people in general can't relate to it. And I don't actually think that I feel like I see my personal experience (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Being represented. Speaker 1: --that often portrayed. Speaker 2: Do you see the experience of your mother [Vivian Tyler Carpenter] or your sister perhaps? Speaker 1: No, no. Maybe every now and again but not with any degree of regularity, no. That's funny, Pat [HistoryMaker Patti Carpenter] (laughter), my sister and I were talking about a movie script the other day. We were actually having a conversation about, Diane Keaton's commercial for her new film came on and we were trying to find a black actress who was Diane Keaton in age. Hard to find, sixty, black woman, in a movie. Very, very difficult--there's like this huge chasm. There's the younger and there's the sort of substantially older. No sixty-something actresses, so we're thinking about that and we're trying to come up with, with movie ideas. And I had to laugh to myself because it's like, I'm almost saying I don't wanna make commercial films 'cause what I'm talking about is trying to make a movie with a black sixty year old actress. It's just not commercial. But that's not--for me that's not what it's all about. I wanna make a living as a filmmaker. I don't necessarily have to become rich or famous to do it. I would just like to make a living at it and be able to do it consistently. And I don't think that, that's such a crazy thing to want. Story_ID: 379004 Speaker 1: Name some of the black female directors whose work you appreciate and that inspires you? Speaker 2: I like Kasi Lemmons' work very, very much. I thought 'Eve's Bayou' was wonderful. I wish she worked more, I don't know why she doesn't (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She's only done that one film, right? Speaker 2: She did 'Eve's Bayou' and she did 'Caveman's Valentine' ['The Caveman's Valentine'], and she was writing a script. I don't know that it ever got made, I don't think she was meant to direct it. I liked 'Love and Basketball,' Gina's [Gina Prince-Bythewood] film. She did 'Disappearing Acts,' which I worked on which I didn't love necessarily. There's just not--it's unfortunate, it's just not that many out there, you know. But they do have a website. Yvonne Welbon who is a documentary filmmaker has a website of black women filmmakers. And she I think updates it fairly regularly. Story_ID: 379005 Speaker 1: So, thinking about the black community, what are your hopes for black filmmakers, black women filmmakers, the black community at large? Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a lot. I would love for black women filmmakers to get a greater opportunity to tell our stories. I don't--I have a friend who thinks I'm crazy that I don't, that I'm not rushing out to try and direct white projects but I feel like there's a million people out there to direct white projects. There's a lot less people out there to write, direct and make films about the black experience, and if we're not committed to making them, I don't know that they're gonna get made or I'm not sure that what's gonna get made we're going to necessarily appreciate. So I want us to have the opportunity to bring the stories to life that we, that we wanna tell. I have the sense that 'Something Right,' 'Something New'? Speaker 1: 'Something New.' Speaker 2: 'Something New,' I have a feeling that, that's probably a very personal film to her [Sanaa Hamri]. I don't know her but that's just my impression, that maybe this is something that either she's experienced or somebody she knows has experienced. It wasn't just somebody who sat in a room thinking, "Oh, I got a great idea for a film." Cheryl Dunye with 'Watermelon Woman' [The Watermelon Woman'], I think 'Eve's Bayou' was very personal to Kasi [Kasi Lemmons], you know. I like that we get those opportunities. For the black community? Oh, my goodness (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: I guess what I want for the black community is the same thing I sort of want for myself. Talking about history makers and trying to find out things about my own history, I wanna know more of where I came from and that's a feeling I'm getting at forty-five. I didn't probably feel that way at twenty. I think it's very useful to know where I came from and I'm--I probably would like to tell stories about my parents [Vivian Tyler Carpenter and Horace Carpenter] 'cause I sometimes sit back and think they lived through segregation, that's a very different world. Speaker 1: Which is very different. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a very different world. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: All right, so, just finishing up, you were just saying for the black community your hope was to have some of the same things that you have-- Speaker 1: That I want for myself, which is to know--it's to really know where I came from, to have a greater appreciation for my own history, yeah. And to appreciate that the--to truly appreciate the sacrifices that other people have made for me to be where I am-- Story_ID: 379006 Speaker 1: Whose shoulders do you feel you stand on? Speaker 2: Definitely my parents [Vivian Tyler Carpenter and Horace Carpenter], and I was preparing for this. I was looking at this DVD (laughter) that my father had made about some of his family, and the shoulders of them they were, you know, they were very, they were always striving for something better than what they had. And they didn't seem, at least in the pictures that I saw, to be beat down by what the situation or the environment that they were clearly living in. I mean, it's the '20s [1920s] and the '30s [1930s] in some of these pictures, you know, they're not, you know, it's segregation. People, you know, they can walk down the street and be spit on but they--you would never know that in these pictures. They are, you know, they're well dressed, they're hanging out, they're married, they got their families, they got their jobs. They're living their lives a hundred percent. I remember years and years ago when there was still apartheid in South Africa, I kind of thought to myself I could never have a child in that kind of situation. And then I realized how incredibly hopeful it actually is to have a child in such an oppressive situation. And that's kind of how I feel like our families were when they just were living their lives to the best of their abilities regardless of what else was happening outside their door-- Story_ID: 379007 Speaker 1: So when you look at the things you've done, you've been able to script supervise some really big films, you have a great working relationship with Spike Lee, you've written, you've made your own movies, what stands out most for you? And you still have a long career ahead of you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's hope so. Speaker 1: --because you're only forty-five so, but what have you done thus far that really stands out? Speaker 2: What have I done? So many things, I mean, if you had asked me at twenty-five was this gonna be the life I had, I would've in no way been able to say, yes. I certainly would probably would have looked at you like you were insane. In my own kind of backdoor kind of way, what stands out as my--I'm aggressive but in a very kind of backdoor, kind of low-key kind of way. The fact that I managed to create the career that I created is probably the most impressive thing. There was no Shari [HistoryMaker Shari Carpenter] as a filmmaker growing up, you know. Speaker 1: But do you tell the stories of your childhood as a filmmaker? Speaker 2: I haven't yet. I do wanna--I'm very much interested and I, I apologize mom [Vivian Tyler Carpenter]. I do really, there's a story I wanna tell about a mother and a daughter that would be based on probably me and my mom. That's definitely something I either want to do as a film or do as a, as a novel. So, yeah, I will. It's interesting that my life is, my life growing up is now a period piece (laughter), 1960s is a period. Speaker 1: (Laughter)...