 Story_ID: 571510 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Today, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Mervyn Malcolm Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally], M-E-R-V-Y-N, M-A-L-C-O-L-M, D-Y-M-A, as in apple, L-L-Y. Speaker 1: All right, and sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: May 5, 1926. Speaker 1: May 5? Speaker 2: I'm sorry, May 12. I'm sorry about that. Speaker 1: All right, 'cause I know I've seen it as May 12, I thought maybe we had an exclusive here (laughter). May 12, okay, 1926, okay. And sir, where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born in a fishing village of Bonasse in the parish of Cedros in the county of St. Patrick, on the island of Trinidad, in-- Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I'm going to pause here for a minute. Speaker 2: Okay. We're being joined by Ellston Carr [ph.] as an observer. You were telling us where you were born. Now, how do you spell the town you were born in? Speaker 1: I was born in the fishing village of Bonasse, B-O-N-A-S-S-E, in the parish of Cedros, C-E-D-R-O-S, in the county of St. Patrick, on the island of Trinidad, in the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, but at the time, in the colony of Trinidad and Tobago, British West Indies. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: My father's [Hamid Dymally] father, my grandfather, came from India as an indentured laborer to work in the coconut and sugar cane estates. Speaker 2: Now, I'm going to ask you about your family history, but I just wanted to, just trying to establish who you are right now-- Speaker 1: Yes, fine. Speaker 2: And what is your occupation, sir? Speaker 1: I presently am in the California [State] Assembly as a legislator representing the 52nd District, which includes Compton [California], Paramount [California], North Long Beach [Long Beach, California], Watts [Los Angeles, California], Willowbrook [California], and part of south Los Angeles [California]. Speaker 2: Now this is sort of a return to the, your political beginnings in a way, right? Speaker 1: It's kind of back to the future (laughter). Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter). Speaker 2: 'Cause you were a congressman as well as-- Speaker 1: I was in the assembly in 1962, then in the California Senate I was the first African American to be elected to the California Senate and lieutenant governor and one of two elected African American lieutenant governors, the other one being George [L.] Brown, of Colorado. Then I went to the United States Congress, so I became the first foreign-born black to serve in the United States Congress, then retired for ten years and was looking for a candidate to run in this district, and everyone kept saying you ought to run, and that spirited me and I went back in to the assembly. Speaker 2: Okay. Now what is today's date? Speaker 1: Today is November 15, 2004. Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 1: We are presently in Compton in my district office. Story_ID: 571511 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask that only require a short answer. The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: Fish. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Navy blue. Speaker 1: All right. A favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Not really, but I would say around a holiday season, yeah. I'm not much of a vacation person. Speaker 1: Now, next question is what is your favorite vacation destination (laughter)? Speaker 2: If I had my way, it would be Tobago, which is part of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, and my fishing village, I still go back there. Speaker 1: And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: "To thine own self be true, and it must follow, the night, the day, thou canst not be false to any man," ['Hamlet,' William Shakespeare]. Story_ID: 571512 Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you about your family history now and I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Hamid Dymally] side of the family. First, can you give us your mother's name and spell it for us, please. Speaker 2: Andreide, A-N-D-R-E-I-D-E, maiden name Richardson. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: You know, I'm gonna tell you something about (laughter) the culture from which I came. We did not keep records as Americans do. You were just born and died. My mother, I happen to know her birthday was in February, but I can't remember her birthdate. We were poor about that, we islanders. Speaker 1: Okay, is there, now, do you have any sense of how old she was when you were born, or thereabouts? Speaker 2: No, I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Well, where was she born? Speaker 2: She was born in the village of Bonasse in Cedros, Trinidad [British West Indies; Bonasse, Trinidad and Tobago]. Speaker 1: All right. And, what do you know about your ancestors on your mother's side? How far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather's name was Avid [ph.], and he came down the Orinoco River from Venezuela and settled in Trinidad. My mother, my grandmother, was part Carib, part Afro, and never mastered the English language, spoke Patois until her death. Speaker 1: All right, so were there any Caribs around, you know-- Speaker 2: Well, by the time I was born they were almost an extinct nation. The Arawaks were gone by the time of my birth. Speaker 1: Those are the people that, just for the record, are the ones that met [Christopher] Columbus, right? Speaker 2: That is correct, and whom he treated very poorly. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: The Caribs, a few were there, but no longer. Speaker 1: Okay. What can you tell us about your grandparents--so your memory doesn't go, you don't know anything about them prior to your grandmother and grandfather. You don't what your ancestors were doing. Speaker 2: Well, last night I discussed that with my older sister. She believes that my grandmother worked for the French estate owners. That's the reason for the Patois who came, and they came from Haiti. All the while we speculated that she might have come from Haiti, but then we realized that other sisters spoke perfect English, but we do know our grandfather, like a number of Venezuelans, came to Trinidad to barter goods, fish for different hardware, et cetera, et cetera. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Now, are there any stories from that side of the family about, about their travels, you know, from-- Speaker 2: You know, growing up as we did, we did not have a sense of history, you know. We just lived. We did not have a sense of race, probably we were more focused on religion than we were race. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're -- Speaker 2: And history. Speaker 1: Were there white people in that part of Trinidad? Speaker 2: No, there was--yes, the district medical officer, and there were some Canadian missionaries, Mr. and Mrs. Kennedy [ph.], who walked down the street arm and arm and we always chuckled about it, and went at night to hear them preach, yeah. That was a form of entertainment, you know, missionaries came and preached and there was nothing else to do. There was no theater, no television, maybe one or two people in the village had a radio, and our big time was listening to Joe Louis and Max Schmeling; certainly, no telephone. Speaker 1: Okay, so the missionary activity was entertaining and all (simultaneous)- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very much so. Speaker 1: Was it more entertaining because they foreign and from another country? Speaker 2: Because they were foreign, there was nothing else to do. We did not, they made no converts because everybody was very much attached to their church, but they preached the word there. Speaker 1: What denomination were they? Speaker 2: Presbyterians from Canada, yeah. Story_ID: 571513 Speaker 1: --For the most part there were people who, is your ancestry typical of that area, a mixture of Carib and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very integrated, if I may, you want me to talk about my grandfather? Speaker 1: On your father's [Hamid Dymally] side or your mother's side? Speaker 2: Yes, father's side. Speaker 1: Well, well let's first--I just wanted to talk about how your mother [Andreide Richardson Dymally] was raised first maybe before we get into anything-- Speaker 2: This was a village [Bonasse, British West Indies; Bonasse, Trinidad and Tobago] in which grandmothers, grandparents, grandmothers, especially, took care of the children, so we grew up with a grandmother and I always fussed with her for speaking Patois and she would say, in Patois, "Ici est un malla garcon." He's a bad boy (laughter). Speaker 1: Say that again, slowly. Speaker 2: "Ici est un malla garcon." Mal, bad, garcon, boy. It's really broken French, you know. And she smoked a pipe. Speaker 1: Was that odd in those days? Speaker 2: Nope. Not odd at all. No, not at all. Speaker 1: It's just odd now, I'd say. Speaker 2: The older men smoked ganja, which is what you call pot here (laughter). Speaker 1: You can get in trouble now-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--but they stop at the side of the road and they smoke their ganja. Speaker 1: So, that was back in the-- Speaker 2: In the '40s [1940s], yes, '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s]. Speaker 1: Now, did your mother talk about how she grew up at all, or do you know anything about how she grew up (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were discussing this--familiarity with appearance was a no-no. When visitors came, you left the room. It's not like now, where kids, you can't get rid of them. They come right into your lap. No, you know, you did not stick around when visitors came, you know. And this question of hugging and kissing, as we do in America here, was not part of our culture. Speaker 1: So, children were not hugged and kissed by their parents? Speaker 2: No. Very formal, affectionate, but not mushy-mushy as we do now, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your mother get a chance to get much schooling in? Speaker 2: No. My mother just finished elementary school in the village. There was no high school. To go to high school, you had to have gone to the other city, some forty miles away, where you board, because there was no daily transportation, so very few of us from that village left and when we left, we never went back because there was nothing else to do but fish and when we left, we never went back 'cause there is nothing else to do but fish, and do the coconut estate. Speaker 1: So, for the most part, would you say that most of the population that fished and so forth, they really-- Speaker 2: Fishermen and men working in the coconut estates. Later on, they discovered some oil, a small supply of oil, but for some strange reason, the Grenadians were the oil workers, because it was hard work, lifting those rigs and moving heavy equipment, so a number of Grenadians came to the oil refinery city point frontier-- Speaker 1: Okay, that's from the island of Grenada, the same one that Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] invaded. Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, um-hm, yes. Okay. Speaker 1: So they knew more about oil, or was that-- Speaker 2: Well, not necessarily. They were just hard workers, laborers, you know. The technicians came from the United States and from England, yeah. I mean, just the name of the oil company- Speaker 1: So are you- Speaker 2: --the UBOT, the United British Oil Fields of Trinidad, ought to give you some idea, yeah, who they were. Speaker 1: So they imported labor, was it because they-- Speaker 2: No, they just came. Immigration was not a problem, you know, for the same reason it was not a problem for my [maternal] grandfather to leave Venezuela and come to Trinidad or vice versa. Many Trinidadians who could not get work went to Venezuela to work in the oil fields, because the oil fields were run by Americans, who spoke English, and the Trinidadians who spoke English. So, you find a number of Trinidadians in Venezuela who came from families who worked in the oil fields and the refineries. Story_ID: 571514 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your father. Can you give us his full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Hamid, H-A-M-I-D, D-Y-M-A-L-L-Y. My grandfather came from India as an indentured laborer to work in sugar cane and coconut estates. Speaker 1: Now, is, does that mean that Dymally is an Indian name? An Eastern Indian name? Speaker 2: From India. When I went to India and met Mrs. [Indira] Gandhi, she asked the Ministry of Culture to try and locate our origins and the best they could come up with was we came from Marishi [ph.] province in a small village called Dymali village. The word Dymally was Anglicized because when you went to school, you were accompanied by another child in the village who were older, who was older than you and they went, and they said, "Oh, his name is Mervyn" so you just spelled the name V-I-N or V-Y-N, whatever the schoolmaster deemed appropriate, and in this case Dymally is really A-L-I and they put a Y and that was it. In fact, my neighbors in Bonasse [British West Indies; Bonasse, Trinidad and Tobago] village are Muslims and they went to a Catholic school and the father just gave them the name Sebastian, because whoever took them there didn't, just knew the first name of the family and so they are Sebastians, French Catholic, but they are Muslims. So, anyhow, my father settled, my grandfather settled in this small village and whereas one grandfather was on the fishing side, he was on the coconut side and subsequently became the merchant in the village. Speaker 1: Now, did he come all the way from India? I mean--did he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. They came as indentured laborers after the end of slavery. They replaced the slaves in coconut estates and sugar cane estates, all or most of whom left and went to the cities and they pursued professions. The Africans got into the civil service and into the professions. The Indians by and large, stayed on the land and subsequently began evolving as a very progressive and middle class group of people; now, about five years ago for the first time, the Indians controlled the island. They have since lost as a result of some internal bickering, but they came from what I witnessed as a boy, dirt farmers, with the floor of the coconut covered leaves houses with dirt floors and the father and the mother walked several miles. He went up the tree and picked the coconuts and she gathered the coconuts for that task. They got one shilling, twenty-four cents. And on their way home, they cultivated the garden and when they came home again, probably the following day, he went and helped the fisherman and the fish that were usually thrown away because they were too small for commercial use, they would take the fish, cut the fish in two, salt it, put it on a clothesline and ride and get what we call corn fish. So here they have the products from the garden, they made oil from the coconut. The only thing they had to buy was flour and rice and then later on they began growing their own rice, so they were almost self-sufficient. So, my sister and I were talking about poverty in Trinidad. It was a different kind of poverty. It was a cash-poor poverty, but lots of food; lots of fish, lots of meat. The Indians don't eat meat. The Africans ate meat, butchered a lot of cattle, but we were cash-poor, but we were rich in religion and food supply and culture and every child there aspired for education. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: And a heavy dose of religion including Catholics, Muslims, Hindus, and Anglicans. Story_ID: 571515 Speaker 1: What was your father [Hamid Dymally] when he came, yeah okay (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father was a Muslim. My mother [Andreide Richardson Dymally] and his father, my grandfather, built the mosque in the village [Bonasse, British West Indies; Bonasse, Trinidad and Tobago]. More recently I got half a million dollars in Trinidad and Tobago, currency from Saudi Arabia, and built a mosque there on land still owned by the family. My mother's people were the pillars of the Catholic church, and there arose this dispute between these two families about the children and we ended up and the Anglican canon was invited to resolve this dispute between these two families. We go to the mosque on Friday nights, the catechism on Saturday (laughter). Speaker 1: That must have made for an interesting-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) He christened all of us as Anglicans, which you call Episcopalians here. Some of my brothers and sisters were taken back to the Catholic church by my grandparents here, but I stayed in the Episcopalian church. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're an Episcopalian now. Okay. Well, did your father tell you any stories about, or your grandfather tell you stories about India or-- Speaker 2: Well, I remember one story from my father. I was telling him about catechism, and about Jesus Christ, and he said, "Yes, we Muslims recognize Jesus Christ as a prophet, but we also have our prophet, Muhammad." That was the first time I became conscious about the prophet, Muhammad, as a young boy. But, this is a small village in which religious followers were very eclectic, you know. You have Hindus going to the Catholic church bazaar, and when their big, festivals, the Indians coped a lot, built a tent, and you have Afros going into there, so it was quite integrated. My wife [Alice Gueno Dymallly] said to my best friend there when I first took her, she said, "I never understood him better than my visit here." Now, what she saw, in effect, was a celebration of my return and there was the steel band played by the African community with some Indians playing. There was the Indian drums, patterned after a celebration Hosay and there were Africans playing drums in the Indian--and then there was the Chinese food, you know, and then there was the Irish priests, and in this small village was very, very integrated racially and religiously. Speaker 1: All right, and people seemed to get along? Speaker 2: Very well, and there was no sense of racial consciousness then. There was more consciousness about religion, although no one really wore it on his or her shoulders. Story_ID: 571516 Speaker 1: What were your parents like? What was your father [Hamid Dymally] like and what was your mother [Andreide Richardson Dymally] like? What kind of personalities did they have (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother was a typical housewife. She took care of the children and she had what we call a parlor, which is what you would call a coffee house here, and she cooked for those oil workers I told you about, you know, who worked at night on the swing shift, and as a boy I had to take the food on my bicycle and one day I ran into a rock and all the food spilled and I had to go back home and she had to cook and take, I took the food back. My father, my grandfather became the merchant, and so my father worked there. Now, my father was one of the few at the time, this one other person, Sam Corrali [ph.], who went to college, really secondary school, and I was quite an elitist in the Queen's Royal College [Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago]; to go there was quite something, and then he came back and he taught my mother. That's where he met my mother, in the classroom. Speaker 1: Okay, so that's how they met. Is there a story? Speaker 2: Bonasse [British West Indies; Bonasse, Trinidad and Tobago] is a small village. Everybody knew everybody else there. Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they met or how they fell in love? Speaker 2: No, you never discuss these intimate things with parents, unlike here, you know. No, you respect that privacy. (Laughter) We never got into that. Speaker 1: Well, I had to ask, so I just--okay (laughter). Speaker 2: It was a reserved relationship between parent and child. Speaker 1: Okay. She was student when he was a teacher. Is that-- Speaker 2: I mean she was a student in the elementary school when my father, having come back from secondary school, was a teacher. In those days, they had what was known as the monitor system at a particular stage in your education in life you became a monitor, teaching, and every year you take an exam and you went on until you get the full certificate. So, people who went to secondary school, and there were very few, were monitors. Most of the teachers came from other parts of the island. Story_ID: 571517 Speaker 1: Tell me about the neighborhood you grew up in, I mean, where is Cedros [Trinidad and Tobago] in relationship to Port of Spain [Trinidad and Tobago], and-- Speaker 2: Cedros, the village, is made up of several villages, Bonasse being one of them, Icacos being another one, I-C-A-C-O-S. Icacos is ten miles from Venezuela, and the men fished in the Gulf of Paria at the mouth of the Orinoco River. In those days Venezuelans looked at the shrimp as sea worms, and they never caught shrimp or never ate shrimp, not until the Japanese came in and began catching the shrimp at the sea bed, at the bed of the Orinoco River, which brought all these rich weeds. Then the Venezuelans began arresting the fishermen, and they were in shock because all their life they had been doing this without any problems and when it became a commercial product, and so there were a lot of diplomatic exchanges and there was a sense of turf among the fishermen, so, and then so there was the fish, which was shipped to Port of Spain, eighty miles away, and then there was--capital of the island--and there was a coconut; in those days coconut and coconut products were very very important. I understand, nutritionists began claiming that coconut had, was high in cholesterol, so the market went down, but then there was also citrus, shipping citrus. Story_ID: 571518 Speaker 1: What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, there was an Indian dish called roti, and I highly recommend it to you. Roti is like a big tortilla, about the size of a moon (laughter) almost, and you eat roti with curry shrimp, chicken, beef, and goat. Goat, mostly Jamaicans, Trinidadians didn't do a lot of goat. So roti was an East Indian food, which became a national food. So, everybody ate, and Trinidadians love Chinese food. The Chinese food in Trinidad, in my judgment, having been all over the world, China, Taiwan, is about the best, because it has a little Creole flavor to it. So, eating roti was--and lots of fish, lots of fish--and then lots of sports, soccer, cricket, you know, and track, all the primitive stuff, you know. No stadium, you know. You're just right on the beach, you know, lots of fun, and catching fish, stealing mangos from mango trees, and you know, a lot of fun. Nobody got arrested. They'd just chase you and complain to your parents that you're throwing stones at the mangos and bam, you get bashed (laughter). Story_ID: 571519 Speaker 1: Continue telling us about some of the sights and sounds and smells [of Trinidad]. You were telling us about taking mangos, stealing mangos before, when we left off (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: It was fun (laughter). Some of it belonged on your family's property, others you just went and threw rocks, climbed up the tree and shook the branch, so a lot of fresh fruit, a lot of fresh vegetables, fresh fish, and so, there was always a lot of food, and neighbors shared. The farmer went to his garden and brought back cassava and bananas, called figs, potatoes, you know, so there was always a lot of food. We just didn't have a lot of money to spend, you know. A pair of tennis shoes then was one shilling for Japanese tennis shoe, one shilling or twenty-four cents. Story_ID: 571520 Speaker 1: You said it was a cash poor, but food rich place. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Speaker 1: When you look back now on it, I mean, do you, most of us have never grown up on a tropical island here in the United States, so I mean, can you, I mean what do you miss about it? Speaker 2: The secondary education that I received there has sustained me over the years. It was more profound than my college education, you know, the great books, you know, geography, we knew the world and could damn near name the governors in the British territories, you know, algebra and poetry, it was a rich education when I compare it, not to secondary here but to my college. It was above college education here. So, that was a rich experience. And-- Speaker 1: This is something. Let me just dwell on this a second, but other key people have discussed this in major conferences. We were talking about the Association of the Study of Negro Life and History [Association for the Study of African American Life and History] and African Heritage Studies Association [AHSA]. I knew there was an African Heritage Studies Association that once had a panel, which consisted of Yon Karu [ph.], and there were quite a few others, Ewart Guinier and others were discussing the impact of the Caribbean writers on American culture, especially in the early part of the century, and how the secondary education from Jamaica or Trinidad was much better than a college education that people received here. It became a heated kind of debate, but I think, I mean all the writers from the Caribbean have made such a big impact here, are some evidence. Speaker 2: The one shortcoming is that they did not have a sense of foreign language. You had to take a foreign language, but just for the purpose of passing an exam, not for the purpose of conversation, and even though we were ten miles away from Venezuela, Spanish was not a prerequisite, and neither was French, but that was typical of British education. It's very English and so are the French. The French are very French. They don't tolerate other languages in their system, but it was--there was a heavy dose of literature, heavy dose of history and geography, so you came out of that with a knowledge about the world; you know, the Black Hole of India [sic. Black Hole of Calcutta, Fort William, Calcutta, India], the white Australian, white Australian policy, you know, and you knew history when you got out of there. You had a feel of what was going on, yeah. So, it was a good education, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, and I forgot. Grammar, punctuation and writing. Writing was actually a drill, you know. You went up to the board and you had cursive and script writing. You practiced writing. There was an art that you had to pursue, yeah. Story_ID: 571521 Speaker 1: They weren't big on art as we know it, or music because everything was calypso, you know. Sometime before we finish, I'll sing you a calypso--no, I was just kidding (laughter). Speaker 2: Oh, no. We'll get it. (Laughter) Do you know anything, I mean, if you can give us a brief line of something, maybe, right now (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of calypso? Speaker 2: That's appropriate Yes. Speaker 1: You want me to sing it? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: (Singing) She was a girl from so-ci-e-ty, she never drink rum, neither whis-key, I gave her a drink of that moonshine drink, and she said, honey child, I can't even think. She said, "Take me, take me yes, I am feelin' lonely, take me back to Chic-a-go, but don't let my mother know." Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: That's a little ditty (laughter). Speaker 2: Is there a name for that one? Speaker 1: Well, it's really, the Trinidad version was 'Take Me Back to Los Iros' ['Don't Let Me Mother Know (Take Me Down to Los Iros)']. Los Iros [Trinidad and Tobago] is the beach, where people gathered for picnics and stuff, you know. Speaker 2: Okay. So, was there a lot of music when you were a kid? Speaker 1: Oh, lots of music, calypso, you know, and there was a famous carnival. Speaker 2: And you said the steel bands-- Speaker 1: The steel bands were very interesting in history. Don't listen to these revisionist historians. The Americans had nothing to do with steel bands. They would have you believe that the steel band was a result of their coming to Trinidad. What happened is you're in the war, World War II [WWII], the governor banned carnivals, and so there was a river called the Dry River, and it was actually dry and it started beating biscuit drums; biscuits, what you call crackers here, came in big drums from overseas, and then they took those drums and they started beating it and the song came out very nice with pipes, pieces of pipe, and from that evolved the steel drum. I was listening to a program one day when the announcer that the 'Rum and Coca-Cola' song was written by a guy named Morey Amsterdam; what happened, Morey Amsterdam was one of these emcees for the USO [United Service Organizations], and he came to Trinidad and joined the Lenten--the season before Lent, they erect tents, much as a Baptist revival tent, and they, they calypsonians sing and they sell these, the sheets of music for a penny in those days. Morey Amsterdam took the 'Rum and Coca-Cola' and when the Andrews Sisters were recording, they lacked one song and he gave it to them, and that's how it became famous. And so, I wrote the announcer and told him about it and he said, "Well how do you know?" and I said, "Well, I used to date the same gal that the calypso singer, Lord Invader, dated so I know all about it." Speaker 2: This is the same Morey Amsterdam who, later on, was, he costarred on 'The Dick Van Dyke Show' on television, same Jewish comedian-- Speaker 1: Yes, yes. And, Time magazine contacted Lord Invader and he came to New York and [Louis] Nizer the famous attorney took his case, and the New York courts ruled that that sheet was, in itself a copyright sheet. Speaker 2: Now, how do you spell Lord Invader? Speaker 1: Invader? Lord Invader. Speaker 2: I-N-V-A-D-E-R, okay. Speaker 1: D-E-R, um-hm. Calpysonians take names, the tiger, the lion, Lord Invader, there was even one called [Black] Stalin, [Mighty] Spoiler, Lord Kitchener, you know, Lord [Horatio Herbert] Kitchener was a famous British figure (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The butcher of--they called him--Omdurman. Speaker 1: So anyhow, he won the case. Lord Invader won the case. New York courts ruled in his favor. Story_ID: 571522 Speaker 1: So there was a lot of joyful experiences as a boy, you know, running barefooted, playing soccer, running on the beach, fishing, swimming in the water, the warm sea water. It was a lot of fun as a boy, yes, growing up. Speaker 2: Um-hm, okay. Now, how would you describe yourself as a young man? I mean, as a little boy and a young man. What kind of a personality did you have and what did people think of you? Speaker 1: I was reflecting on that recently, and I had no sense of direction, no aspiration. There was family aspiration for you. Every young man in Trinidad, in the islands, Jamaica, et al, went to England to study two professions only, medicine or law. It didn't matter whether you had an inclination for it. There was no aptitude test, no SAT. If you finished the senior Cambridge exam [Cambridge Senior Examinations], you studied medicine or law, that's it (Laughter) The Ph.D. was never recognized and did not, was not recognized until the prime minister, Eric Williams, went back there as a major scholar, Oxonian scholar, taught at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], that the Ph.D. was recognized, but before that I don't think there was a single Ph.D. in Trinidad, and if there were nobody, they resented calling them doctors. A doctor was an M.D. But being an M.D. or a lawyer gave you social mobility. It gave you economic stability, and you more likely ended up in politics. So, those two professions, not until after World War II [WWII], when people began diversifying their studies, especially when they opened up The University of the West Indies [at Mona, Mona, Jamaica] in Jamaica, and then subsequently a branch in Trinidad [The University of the West Indies at St. Augustine, St. Augustine, Trinidad and Tobago]. Story_ID: 571523 Speaker 1: Now where did you go to school in the beginning? Speaker 2: Well, there was no intermediate, no high school in Cedros [British West Indies; Cedros, Trinidad and Tobago] or the next village Point Fortin [British West Indies; Point Fortin, Trinidad and Tobago], where the refinery was located. You had to go to San Fernando [British West Indies; San Fernando, Trinidad and Tobago] or Port of Spain [British West Indies; Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago]. Speaker 1: Okay, now, but in your village where did you go to school? Speaker 2: Cedros. Cedros Government School [Cedros, Trinidad and Tobago], yeah. In fact, it was over a hundred years old and they could not get any of the governments to build a school and the mythology is that the people in the village burnt the school down. So, (laughter) they built a new school. The prime minister is reported to have said that Cedros is a part of Venezuela because the attachment, you know, the cultural attachment to Venezuela and-- Speaker 1: It's just ten miles away. Speaker 2: Yeah, just ten miles away. Speaker 1: Just across the--channel, I guess. Speaker 2: The Gulf, yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: So, all right, so, well, did you like school when you started it, as a--? Speaker 2: No. I was not a good student. I recall when I was going to college, I took an interest in geography and history, and I, mine is a very interesting story. I took the senior Cambridge exam [Cambridge Senior Examinations] and failed the English literature part. In those days, you could not take the one part which you failed. You had to go back to school to take, for another year, 'cause the exam was only given once a year by a Cambridge [University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England] professor, who came to the island by boat and if you were going to Naparima College [San Fernando, British West Indies; San Fernando, Trinidad and Tobago], you were shifted on that day to St. Benedict's College [La Romaine, British West Indies; La Romaine, Trinidad and Tobago] and vice versa. He broke the seal and issued the exam and if you failed any part of the English part of the exam, then you had to take it all over. But by then, waiting for the exam, because the result didn't come until about six months later, I had gone into long pants, because you only went to school in short pants and high socks. I had gone into long pants. I was drinking booze, going to calypso dances, chasing girls, and there was a young doctor from Grenada. The Grenadians came to Trinidad because it was much more prosperous. Dr. David Pitt, who subsequently became the first Lord, black Lord, in England, Lord David Pitt, who was then Dr. David Pitt, who began organizing a West Indian National Party, aiming for federation of all the islands, and I don't know what got into me, but you know under the British system, it's perfectly proper to heckle, and you've seen it in the House of Commons, so I went there heckling. Speaker 1: Yes, they make that noise (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went there heckling-- Story_ID: 571524 Speaker 1: There's a young, Grenadian doctor, Dr. David Pitt, who subsequently became the first lord [sic.] in the House of Lords, and I had an opportunity to visit the House of Lords. It was quite a moving experience with him, and he organized the West Indian National Party to move to West Indian federation, making a nation of the many islands. When I went there, I don't know what got into me. I don't know what got into me, hecklin' him. I gotta tell you, Father Boniface, principal of the college [St. Benedict's College, La Romaine, Trinidad and Tobago], (unclear) he was madder than hell that one of his students would go and heckle. Well, by then I was out of school and the union, Oil Workers Union [Oilfield Workers' Trade Union], got me and gave me this huge salary of eight dollars, seven dollars a week, one dollar a day. As the gopher, I used to go collect native revenue from Coca-Cola, and read all of the junk mail. Some of it was very very interesting and educational, and two of which were the Chicago Defender, and the Pittsburgh Career [New Pittsburgh Courier]. Now, as an aside, when Hayakawa was, turned out to be this right winger, and he, I would meet him. I would always needle him by telling him, "Oh by the way, I knew Dr. Hayakawa when he was a columnist for a black newspaper." and he would squirm. He was a columnist for the Chicago Defender, a linguistic columnist. Speaker 2: S.I. Hayakawa? Speaker 1: Yes, yes. And he would just be nervous as all heck, so there was one of the people I read, anyhow, saw all of these homecoming stories and wrote to a number of schools, including Lincoln University in [Jefferson City] Missouri. I chose Lincoln University because it was a no tuition school, fifty dollars registration fee. But after I got admitted, I learned that they were not on the approved list for foreign students. During the post-World War II [WWII] history about Communism, a school had to be listed in the [U.S.] Department of Justice, because there was no department of education as a school approved for foreign students. And so this school was unapproved, not academically, legally. And so, I had to wait another year before they got approval. I did not even know that. Speaker 2: Okay, so you chose Lincoln-- Speaker 1: Lincoln because of the tuition. Oh, there's another reason, there's another reason. There's another reason. Lincoln had a separate but unequal decision for their own journalism school, because blacks could not get into the journalism school at the University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri], so they created this journalism school on campus. Now, I figure not having the Senior Cambridge [Cambridge Senior Examination], but having some experience, I named myself as a journalist. Speaker 2: You were writing for the oil union paper, write? Speaker 1: Yeah, little gossip stuff. I mean, you know-- Speaker 2: It was The Vanguard, right? Speaker 1: (Laughter) There is no heavy stuff. A little gossip, you know, but--and the young people started reading the papers because I wrote such-and-such party hailed and such-and-such person was there. But, you know, I got admitted to Lincoln, and so I was in the school of journalism. Armistead Pride, at the time, was head of the school, and Consuelo Young was the professor there, and that was a great experience. It was the year that Almena Lomax won a prize [Wendell L. Willkie Award for Negro Journalism] for writing about the return of black GIs and their white wives. Speaker 2: What was her first name? Speaker 1: Almena Lomax. Speaker 2: Almena Lomax, okay. Speaker 1: I think her son is now head of UNCF [United Negro College Fund], Michael Lomax, and she has a famous daughter here, Melanie Lomax. Speaker 2: Are they related to Louis Lomax, by any chance? Speaker 1: I don't know. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Louis Lomax was a commentator, right? Speaker 2: He was a writer, he wrote a book on Malcolm X ['When the Word is Given: A Report on Elijah Muhammad, Malcolm X, and the Black Muslim World,' Louis E. Lomax] and he wrote-- Speaker 1: No, I don't think so. But he was out here [Los Angeles, California] at one time and he had a radio show [sic. television show, 'The Louis E. Lomax Show']. Story_ID: 571525 Speaker 1: So I went to Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri] totally unprepared. I got to Miami [Florida] and didn't quite understand the effects, the nature of segregation, and I got into a segregated train from Miami to Missouri, and when I got to St. Louis [Missouri], then transportation was integrated and I took another train from St. Louis to Jefferson City [Missouri]. Speaker 2: How did you feel about that? Coming, getting all segregated and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was a nervous wreck. I met a woman who kind of befriended me, an older woman, 'cause I was so nervous that when I signed the traveler's check, they wouldn't accept it because it didn't match my original signature. Well, you know, here you have a nineteen-year-old kid with no prior briefing; in fact, I tell this story because it sounds kind of Hollywoodish but it's true. We went to the American consulate. There was not an embassy then because Trinidad was still a colony, and the consulate officer asked me what is my race. I had never, I'm nineteen years old, I've never been asked this question. I turned to my father [Hamid Dymally], "What does she mean?" And she said, "Well, you know there's an anti-Oriental immigration law that Orientals cannot migrate to the United States and I think"--now, she's looking at my father as an East Indian--"and I think you better list yourself as African." And thus I became an African. Now, in Trinidad, I would be what you call a dougla. I would spell it d-o-u-g-l-a. A dougla is a mix of East Indian and African, so my father is East Indian, and my mother [Andreide Richardson Dymally] is African, and in Trinidad, you could be what you want to be. If you want to be with the Indian part of your heritage, you can go and be an Indian. If you want to be an African part, you know, you had that choice then, not now. It's a little--race is a little more pronounced now. And so, a good example is my sister listed her race as Indian, and when she got ready to come here, we had some difficulty getting her papers, but when India became independent, they changed the law. Anyhow--so, I came here very nervous but I was greeted at Lincoln with a great deal of warmth and friendship, yeah. Speaker 2: Now, were your parents excited about you coming or did they have-- Speaker 1: Well, I was having a great time. I was, you know, going to calypso dances. We had a group of us who got together almost every day drinking rum and eating Chinese food, and things were all very cheap. You get a bottle of rum for a dollar and twenty cents, and my mother just kinda got a little worried about me and kept pushing me, you know, to come and--so--they were very proud. Story_ID: 571526 Speaker 1: One thing I neglected to ask you, we need to do this before you move on, is how many brothers and sisters do you have, and where do you fall in? Speaker 2: Let's start off with those who are here. I have three sisters; one is an RN, one is a lawyer, and one is a retired beauty school operator, and I have two brothers in Trinidad, one looks after the family house in the village [Bonasse, Trinidad and Tobago] and the other one is in San Fernando [Trinidad and Tobago]. My brother died in Venezuela, a very interesting story about that brother. He was a half-brother, and his mother left him some land. She died, no, he met one of those Venezuelans I talked about who came on the boat and sold goods. He was in the customs, Americans had left, was about to close and lose his job, and he said to them, "I'd like to go to Venezuela." And they said, "Meet us at the island." It was several small islands off Port of Spain [Trinidad and Tobago], and he went there and sure enough they came and picked him up, and he landed in this small village, fishing village in Venezuela. The first person he runs into is a Trinidadian, who was close to the (unclear) chief of police, takes him to the chief of police, and in two minutes he is a Venezuelan citizen. He gets a birth certificate, and came back to Trinidad to discover he had two pieces of land. The lawyer forged his mother's signature and took one piece and he got madder than hell and swore he'd never come back. And so, we didn't hear from him. We just figured he'd died, so one day I said to my wife [Alice Gueno Dymally], "Look, I'm in [U.S.] Congress now. I've got access to the embassies. I chaired the subcommittee on international operations, which had oversight responsibilities for the state department [U.S. Department of State], the embassies, the USAID [United States Agency for International Development], U.S. Information Service [sic. United States Information Agency], United Nations [UN]. Let's go to Venezuela and look for my brother." So, we went there and we did some TV shows like '[The] Today Show' ['Today'] and went to the newspapers, interviewed, and I left and I said, "Look, if he turns up and says--you ask him what's his father's name--and then ask him where was his father born." I left. I was in Detroit [Michigan] pursuing a constituent problem, and I got a call from the office. Someone called the embassy in Venezuela and said, "Your father's name is Hamid [Dymally] and he is from Bonasse village and his son's name is Claudius [ph.]." But then he had changed his name from Dymally to Garcia, so I called him yes, and I went down there and now how did he find out about me? He lived with his daughter and he left his key at home that morning and after he arrived from work, he got there before his daughter, she went next door and killing some time, he picked up the newspaper and on a back page, there was big story, "US Congressman Seeks Brother," and he said to me he almost had a heart attack! He looked and there was my picture looking for him. And I went down there to discover that Venezuelans only drink a very expensive champagne with one hell of an expensive party (laughter). The whole family came, you know, to celebrate. Speaker 1: Okay. That's a distinction. Speaker 2: He's passed away. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: And then, of course, I had a brother, two brothers died, one from Alzheimer's. Speaker 1: Okay, so there were--how many of you all, altogether? Speaker 2: I stopped counting (laughter). There's Claudius, there's Marjorie, Mervyn, Chip [ph.], Rudolph [ph.], Bing, Roma [ph.], Courtney, Hazel, Marge [ph.], counting myself ten, eleven? Speaker 1: That's eleven, okay, all right. That was a big family (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: But not the same mother. Story_ID: 571527 Speaker 1: You came here in 1946, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In '46 [1946] yeah. Speaker 1: World War II [WWII] is going on; no, just over with, just over with. Speaker 2: All the GIs, the GI Bill of Rights [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], yeah, a lot of GIs on campus. Speaker 1: Yeah, so the GIs are coming back and coming to school. How did you like Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri]? Speaker 2: Loved it. But, I couldn't adjust. Downtown was segregated. You had to use your passport if you wanted to go to the drugstore. I hated that. And then-- Speaker 1: So you had to--let's stop a second--you had to prove that you were not an African American to be able to go to places-- Speaker 2: To the drugstore, if you went to the movies, you know. Segregated if you want to stop by and get a Coke [Coca-Cola] in the drug store. Speaker 1: So you could go if you could prove you weren't from here. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: But if they thought you were-- Speaker 2: Couldn't go. Speaker 1: Yeah, you couldn't go in. Speaker 2: I hated that. But I--the question of work. See, Jefferson City [Missouri] was a college town and there were no jobs available. So I left and went to New York [New York] and it wasn't any better there. Poor counseling, didn't know my way around, worked on several jobs washing dishes, worked in the garment industry, then I read a story of a chiropractic school in Dayton, Ohio, and the setting was on a hill. It was really glamorous, in Ebony magazine, and I took the Greyhound bus, went to Dayton, Ohio, and went to chiropractic school and subsequently transferred to another school; in fact, this other school raided some of Reaver's students and went to Anderson, Indiana. Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute. What was the name of the school in Dayton? Speaker 2: Reaver School of Chiropractic [Dayton, Ohio]. Speaker 1: R-I-V-A (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) R-E-A E-R. Speaker 1: I'm sorry. R-E-A-V-E-R. Speaker 2: E-A-V-E-R. Story_ID: 571528 Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): You have speed (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Here's my dilemma. I'm on a student visa, I did not report annually as I was supposed to. What do I do? I cannot go back home without a degree. And then I got into this quick chiropractic degree [at Reaver School of Chiropractic, Dayton, Ohio] to recognize that Trinidad at the time did not recognize chiropractor. In fact, they didn't even want to recognize American doctors. That's how British they were. And that has changed somewhat, changed considerably. But, so, when I got there, after finishing, Ohio did not, or Indiana did not recognize chiropractic. That was the heartland of the American Medical Association. So, I went to Chicago [Illinois]--oh yes, McCook, Illinois, where there's a Reynolds Aluminum plant, and I was staying with a friend in Chicago, a Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri] friend, and I went to church with them and heard about this college out here called Chapman College [Chapman University, Orange, California]. Why Chapman? Because Chapman had what was then known as a single subject study system, the foyer [ph.] system. Under the single subject study system, you took one class at a time for five units, so three classes per semester gave you fifteen units. And if you wanted more units you could go in the afternoon, but the afternoons were left for you to work. But, the problem was this. The students, they were all middle class students, and when you got an assignment on Monday, you had to turn it in back on Tuesday, so I'm working at night in a dye cast factory, you know, I didn't have any time. I was flunking out. So, I went across the street. By then I had earned some credits via transcript. I went across the street and signed up at [Los Angeles] City College [Los Angeles, California], and after, when I got the sixty units, I transferred to then what was Los Angeles State College of Applied Arts and Sciences, which subsequently became Cal State University at Los Angeles [California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], which at the time, shared offices and buildings and instructors at City College. I finished there and I still had the student status. Knowing what to do, a friend of mine said, "Look, you know. California has just mandated the teaching of special education to mentally retarded." Speaker 1: Now, let's go back a little bit. I want to pick at the chronology, just to make sure we know when you're doing these things. When you went from Lincoln University, you arrived at Lincoln in '46 [1946]. You went to Dayton [Ohio] in what year? Speaker 2: And to New York [New York] for the summer. Speaker 1: Well, what year did you go to Dayton? Speaker 2: Early part, spring of '47 [1947]. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. That's the spring of '47 [1947]. Then you went to New York for the summer. Speaker 2: No, no, no. After I left Lincoln, I went to New York for the summer, yes. Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right. So you went to New York in the spring of '47 [1947]. Okay. Speaker 2: And half of the winter. Speaker 1: Okay. And then you went to chiropractic school in Dayton. Speaker 2: In Dayton, Ohio. Speaker 1: Okay, and that's like forty, yeah-- Speaker 2: And then I went to, I finished, transferred to another school in Indiana. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And finished there. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And then went to Chicago. Speaker 1: What part of Indiana was this? Speaker 2: Anderson, Indiana. Speaker 1: Anderson, okay. Speaker 2: GM [General Motors] has a plant there. Went to Chicago, couldn't get into Roosevelt College [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois], worked conscious of my violation of my student status, heard about Chapman College. Got back into school. Speaker 1: So you were trying to stay one step ahead of those who might-- Speaker 2: One step ahead of the INS [Immigration and Naturalization Service] (laughter). Story_ID: 571529 Speaker 1: While I'm at Chapman [College; Chapman University, Orange, California], I get a letter from home from the immigration office, wanting to know how did I leave the United States, by boat, by air, by sea, I mean, by land, because they have no record of me having reported, but when I landed in Miami [Florida], the immigration officer asked me how long do I want to stay, and I figure it takes five years to finish medical school, so I just said five years and he stamped, I thought. We have to, after extending that length of time you have to report every year, so I got this letter and I panicked, went to the dean, and the dean gave me a letter, I went over to the immigration office, and, "Where've you been??" He opened his door, "Hey, Joe! Come here. This guy's been in this country since '46 [1946] and he's never reported to us." So I told him I didn't know, and so I transferred over and finished. But there was a part of me that you should know. I even, going to Cal State L.A. [Los Angeles State College of Applied Arts and Sciences; California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], I had not quite figured out what I wanted to do. And so, I was working at night. I went to a defense plant during the Korean War, and in front of me there's a Russian, and he obviously had a green card, and the woman came to me and said, "Where were you born?" And I said, "Trinidad." And she said, "Colorado?" And I didn't answer. I got the job. But, every day I feared that immigration would pull my card. And one night, the foreman came to me and said, "Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally], do you play baseball?" "No," I said, "I play cricket." He said, "No, no, no. I'm talking about baseball." I said, "Why?" He said, "Well, in baseball three strikes and you're out. You got two strikes and you're out." October 15, 1951, was my day of emancipation. I came to the realization that in the United States there was no substitute for hard work and education. My grades shot up from C to B to A, and from that day on, I never stopped working. Very short time in my life that I was ever without two jobs or two assignments. That changed. That warning by that foreman. I don't know what I was doing. I was goofing off, you know. I didn't have a sense of direction. I didn't know where I wanted to go, but that struck me. Where would I go if I lose this job? I can't go back home. I don't have a degree. I can't get another job like this because I've been wandering around trying to get a job, you know. I get a job at night, have to go to school in the day, get a job in the day, have to go school at night. Here I had a regular gig, you know, four to twelve, go to school in the morning. It changed my life. Story_ID: 571530 Speaker 1: So I got my teaching credential, passed the exam at Los Angeles Unified School District, and began substituting in the day and working at night, bringing my family over here. Even as a boy, I was never afraid of work. I just didn't have a sense of direction and I got tired, decided to leave, and a friend of mine said, "You know, what are you going to be doing?" I said, "Well, I really don't know." "Well, why don't you join the Young Democrats in Pasadena [California]?" So, that sounds like an interesting thing to do. I was involved in labor politics in Trinidad, and so I'm coming on the Pasadena Freeway [Arroyo Seco Parkway] with my old hotrod Dodge, hotrod Plymouth and I heard the news of Greensboro [North Carolina] sit-in. Speaker 2: This was 1961? Sixty, '61 [1961]--'60 [1960]. Speaker 1: It was 1960. I said to myself, "What am I doing here in Pasadena with these white folks? Why don't I do something in the black community?" There's no Young Democratic club in a black community, so I went to the headquarters, and there's my friend, Joe Schirelle [ph.], whom I, you know, am meeting for the first time. I said to him, "Can I help you, sir?" I said, "Yeah, I'd like to organize a Young Democratic club." He said, "You mean to say you want to join one?" I said, "No, I want to organize one." And so, he gave me the information. I got together a group of people, one of whom is still alive in San Diego [California], Hank Hodge [ph.], who was national president of the Congress of Racial Equality [CORE], and Hank and I still stay in touch with each other. So, I go to a meeting and there are two factions now in California politics. There is Senator Alan Cranston, in the California Democratic Council, and there is speaker Jess Unruh [Jesse M. Unruh], Democratic State Central Committee, and I went to a meeting, not knowing which faction. I was just invited to this meeting. And they were cutting up the pie and they did not mention anyone running for treasurer, and I just know he said, "Who's running for treasurer?" The candidate for president of the Young Democrats who was from Georgia, Darrien Moore [ph.], said, "You are." All of a sudden I'm a candidate for treasurer. Why did he say that? He was from Georgia, the Civil Rights Movement, running against someone we called the west side liberals, he's in the Unruh camp, would be pretty good politics to have a black on his slate. I became a Young Democrat, treasurer. Story_ID: 571531 Speaker 1: And I go to a meeting, the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] campaign is on now, Jess Unruh [Jesse M. Unruh] is running the Kennedy campaign, and I took a friend, Leon [D.] Ralph who subsequently became a member of the [California State] Assembly, and now he is a bishop in the Church of God in Christ, and Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy] comes to me and stuck his finger in my chest and says, "Why aren't there more Negros at this meeting?" At the time, there was Leon Ralph and myself with all of these white folks. I said "Your brother's not popular in the black community, Negro community." "What do you mean?" Well, at the time--no, he said, "You make him popular." At the time, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had a bill in the [U.S.] Senate to change the selection of the jury system because of the problems in the South. The Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] lawyers, and Kennedy represented Harvard at the time, said to him don't do that. We need to change the laws and the structure of the jury system, so Clarence Mitchell, who was the father of the Civil Rights Act [of 1964] under [President Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower, put out word that Kennedy is not a friend, and so, now Gus Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins], now, and Jess Unruh, were rivals in the Assembly. For the Kennedy campaign they made peace. Jess Unruh appointed Hawkins chairman of the Rules Committee, so there was the community groups with Kennedy, Frank Reeves, who subsequently became the first director of the Joint Center for Political Studies [Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C.], previous to that, a White House staffer was sent out here, organized the community groups for Kennedy. They were looking for someone. The candidate they liked was a guy named Frank Terry. Frank could not get a leave of absence from Douglas Aircraft [Company]. He came to me and asked me if I would take the job and I was excited. I went downtown to get a leave of absence from the district. I went in to my old principal and she said to me, "Mr. Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally], are you crazy, leaving a teaching job to go into politics?" And Kennedy, as you know, lost California, but they were pleased with the work that Unruh did, and Governor Pat Brown appointed me to the California Disaster Office, and then I, it was in Sacramento [California], meeting with the lobbyists and the members, and Jess Unruh and Gus Hawkins and--but prior to that when I was organizer of the Young Democratic club, I went and knocked on Gus Hawkins' office door and he came out and I said, "Mr. Hawkins, I was sent here by Spencer Wiley of United Auto Workers," who was part of the community Groups for Kennedy, "and I want to organize a Young Democratic club, and I just wanted you to know about it." "Fine." So I am now a coordinator in a California Disaster Office, civil defense, I'm transferred from Sacramento back to Pasadena [California]. Speaker 2: Now, what year is this? Is this '60 [1960], '61 [1961]. Speaker 1: We are into '61 [1961]. Story_ID: 571532 Speaker 1: So, there was a conference of the United Auto Workers, my old alma mater in Hot Springs, Fresno [California]. I go up there and Hawkins [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins] comes to me and says "Mervyn [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally], can I get a ride with you to Los Angeles [California]?" He was driven from Sacramento [California] to Fresno, and his staffer went back to Sacramento, so he needed a ride, and on my way I had, my roommate was the director of the Rules Committee, Steve Smith, and he had tipped me off that a district, a black district was being drawn for Hawkins, and I said, "Mr. Hawkins, I understand you're going to run for [U.S.] Congress. Who will succeed you?" He says, "I don't know." I thought it was rather odd. This guy has been in public office for twenty-eight years, and he doesn't have a successor. So I came home and got to think about it, and it sounded like a good idea to move into his district. Now, why wasn't there anyone aspiring for this office? The job paid three hundred dollars a month, and I mortgaged my house on what we call the West Adams District, and bought a house on the Eastside, South Central District [Los Angeles, California], and ran. Now, the old timers said, "Hey, who is this guy? He comes from nowhere, and he's running for the [California State] Assembly." They put Gus Hawkins' brother [Edward Hawkins] in the race, neutralize Gus. Gus was with me. Neutralize him because his brother's in the race, and he stayed neutral to his credit, but it was a time of change, a time of young people. There's a lobbyist who tells the story about me riding buses and passing out my tabloid. Lots of people thought I was a black Muslim or something, but we'd go downtown and take the bus to South Central, and then go up this way and come back this other way, and then up, all along driving the buses, passing out my literature and walking the streets. And we won. Jess Unruh [Jesse M. Unruh], who was viewed as the political boss in California, said to me, "Mervyn, I don't think you could win. Gus Hawkins has been in the Assembly for twenty-eight years. His brother has been on the county committee for the same amount of years. No way in the world you could beat this Hawkins man," and we did. We left the hard work up to the young people. It was a time for change, you know, yeah. Story_ID: 571533 Speaker 1: Now, are you married by this time? Speaker 2: Yeah, married in the '50s [1950s] two children, Mark, September '54 [1954], Lynn September '58 [1958], divorced in '66 [1966]. My problem was that I was addicted to politics. If I had a choice between politics and my family, it was always politics, and during the course of the divorce, my mother-in-law had my daughter to believe that it was her mother's fault and Lynn was very upset with her mother, and I had to tell her, take her aside and said, "Look, it's my fault, not your mother's fault" because she had lost her daddy from the house. And then I, Alice [Gueno Dymally] and I were married in 1968. I have no children with Alice. Speaker 1: Okay. So you have like two children. Speaker 2: Lynn is a professor in business law at California State [University] Long Beach [Long Beach, California], and Mark is in the water business. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Well, what was it like? Now, you're elected to the California State Assembly, representing District 52, the same one that you're representing now, right? Speaker 2: I think it was, at the time 53. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And the Hawkins were 62, change to 53. I'm in a daze. I mean, I can't believe it. (Laughter) You know, this boy from Bonasse [Trinidad and Tobago] is in the Assembly. Speaker 1: Do you think--what was the--what do you think, was the key to the victory you riding the buses and getting amongst the people? Speaker 2: And walking and a lot of young people in the Congress of Racial Equality [CORE] was involved. Speaker 1: Were you more militant then or more-- Speaker 2: I was never really militant nor aggressive because, you know, Mr. Hawkins, Ed Hawkins [Edward Hawkins], Gus' [HistoryMaker Augustus F. "Gus" Hawkins] brother, was up in his sixties and I was in my thirties, and I represented this change, and my good luck, I was Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] driver, and then when he came to town I went and picked him up and brought him around and there was a student from Trinidad here studying photography. And (makes noise) everywhere was a click, click, click. Story_ID: 571534 Speaker 1: So I remember one time there was a big demonstration, a big meeting at Second Baptist Church [Los Angeles, California] about police brutality, and the organizer of the meeting was the editor of the Los Angeles Sentinel newspaper, who was also the manager of my leading opponent, and both of them were there inside. I was outside in the rain passing out my literature and people are just looking at me in a most admiring way. You know, this guy, two of them were making, but hear what happened inside. The manager gave the key note speech, and the candidate was the emcee. So, he made no news. Emcees never make news, you know that, and so, he represented the civil rights team. I represented the younger generation. I was with the Congress of Racial Equality [CORE], you know, which looked upon them as kind of establishment people. Speaker 2: Yeah, CORE is more cutting edge-- Speaker 1: Militant, yeah. I was never militant. In fact, my campaign manager, Bill Greene, who subsequently succeeded me in the [California State] Assembly, came to me and says, "Man, the brothers and sisters don't think you're militant enough. You should go and get arrested." I said, "Tell you what, Bill. You get me elected, first time I get arrested after, okay, but not before" (Laughter) I should go down, you know, to the Parker Center [Los Angeles, California]. We organized a paper tagger called STOP. Stop Terrorizing Our People, you know, and there's a right wing commentator who got my immigration number from the immigration and read my number out and said I wasn't a citizen, you know, I was anti-police and all of it, and they wanted me to go to jail. I said no way (laughter). You got me elected first and I'll show you how militant I am. Speaker 2: Okay. See, well, what were the issues-- Speaker 1: Police brutality. It was a time when the Muslims were full shot in '61 [1961], '62 [1962]. Speaker 2: Is that the famous incident where, I think, Malcolm X, even in the movie they have him showing the diagram of (simultaneous)--? Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) --on Slauson [Avenue] and Broadway [Avenue]. Speaker 2: And we had the big photographs of the injuries and all. Speaker 1: So, they had this big meeting with Malcolm X, you know, and I am a Muslim and complained--I said, "Look, you know, I am Muslim by heritage, my father [Hamid Dymally] is a Muslim and you guys ignore me." They said, "All right, at the next meeting, you know, you give the lead address." So I open the meeting, "Salaam alaikum." Boy and they went wild. Where did this guy get this thing from? He's talking to one of us, you know. And the police is taping this and the police gave it to Putnam, George Putnam then on the right, and Putnam broadcast this stuff, Dymally's [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally] a Muslim, black Muslim, and stuff like that. I took him to the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] for that. I never said I was a black Muslim. I said I was a Muslim, of Muslim heritage. I won the case, and everybody advised me not to take equal time. By taking equal time, he could tear into you, you know, so I didn't take equal time. It was a sense of satisfaction. I won, the FCC ruled in my favor. So, yeah, I was kind of militant in those days, not afraid to criticize the police, you know, and I had these young, you know, activists with me, Congress of Racial Equality; in fact, I'm gonna be interviewed Saturday by Bill Boyarsky, former metropolitan editor for the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times], was writing a book on Jess Unruh ['Big Daddy: Jesse Unruh and the Art of Power Politics,' Bill Boyarksy] and he reminded me that the core of people were picketing for fair housing in 1964, when I was up there in Sacramento [California], and they worked out of my office, which caused me some headaches and stayed at my house. Bill Greene and I, my campaign manager, he became the first black to serve as a clerk on a, bill clerk, announcing the bills and so on, and we had a house. We sought to get a place in a different neighborhood, and they wouldn't rent to us, and we gave up and were criticized by a newspaper for not pursuing it, but the problem we faced we needed housing right away. It's not like living someplace where you could fight the case. We didn't have any place to stay so we just rented a house which turned out to be okay. Story_ID: 571535 Speaker 1: The issue of police brutality, now this is, this is something that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a big issue. It was worse in those days. Police would stop you. I remember I was working in this defense plant and one of my, I had two riders, one a friend from Kansas City [Missouri], who went to Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri], and the other one was a German girl, and they'd stop us every, almost every night, and pull us over (laughter). Now, the Zoot Suit Riots were here before you got--happened before you got here (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, I think it was in '45 [sic. 1943], I think. Speaker 2: The Mexican community, the African American community, have always had these issues with the police here. Speaker 1: Police, even now. Speaker 2: You're right. Any of those famous Rodney King riots of the '90s [1990s] and before, you know, the police always-- Speaker 1: Rodney King and more recently, the flashlight beating. Speaker 2: So, this is a continual source of-- Speaker 1: Aggravation, yeah. Speaker 2: Right. So, what, that was one issue you worked on. What else in terms of -- Speaker 1: Well, you know, I think my legacy there was really encouraging young people to come into the system. I was only there for four years and the piece of legislation that I think that I supported was a bill to teach African American history in the public schools. I don't think I could get that passed now. The state has gotten so far to the right. Speaker 2: When did you get that passed? Speaker 1: In 1964. Speaker 2: In '64 [1964], okay. And you've--now one thing that happened to you at Lincoln that we didn't really discuss about Lincoln was your relationship to Lorenzo Greene, right? You remember-- Speaker 1: Well, yes. Lorenzo took me under his wing and, you know, I would spend Sunday, have dinner at his house, yeah. And then, when I got into the [California State] Assembly and introduced this legislation, he was very pleased and he got me the award from the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History [Association for the Study of African American Life and History]. Speaker 2: Lorenzo Greene was very active in the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History. Speaker 1: And he was a member of the Civil Rights Advisory Commission in Missouri [Missouri Advisory Committee to the United States Commission on Civil Rights], also-- Story_ID: 571536 Speaker 1: You're in the [California] State Assembly and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the assembly. The assembly, Jess Unruh [Jesse M. Unruh] was the leader and I spent two terms there, four years, and then there was a one man, you know, say one person, one vote, one of the famous decisions of the Warren Court. And California had forty senators with only one in Los Angeles County, because senators were given districts by counties, so Los Angeles [California] just had one. In the smaller counties, they would be called the cow counties, some of them were so small that some of them had two or three. And after the one man, one vote, then Los Angeles rose from one to thirteen and a half, and so a district was drawn. And so, a district was drawn. Speaker 1: That's a real big jump, so a lot of people were really unrepresented. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. And so I became the first black senator in California. Speaker 1: So that's 1966, right? Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. What's your legacy there in the California State Senate? Speaker 2: Well, when I got in the Assembly, there was a fellowship program [California State Assembly Fellowship Program; Jesse Marvin Unruh Assembly Fellowship Program] conducted by UC Berkeley [University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California] and funded by the Ford Foundation and run by the Assembly, and there was only one black in the program over time, and I went to Jess Unruh, complaining. So he assigned a staff member to me to develop a proposal, now, I mean to the Senate, and we took it to the Ford Foundation. The program vice-president was Mike Sveridorf [ph.], who was a former United Auto Workers, and I told you I came from United Auto Workers, so that was helpful. They assigned Chris Edley [Christopher Edley, Sr.], no--I'm sorry--Chris Edley comes later on. We'll talk about that. Remind me, if I forget, to talk about Chris and the Joint Center for Political Studies [Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C.]. And so, they funded us to train Negro youth in public affairs. And, Bill Greene, who now is in the Assembly, Teresa Hughes was running, going to run the program, the high school section of the program from Puerto Rican Harlem [New York, New York], bilingual, working on a Ph.D. at Claremont [Graduate School; Claremont Graduate University, Claremont, California]. The three of us came to the realization that California is not a black state. It is becoming Latino. We need to expand this program. So, we broke away from the mandate and we brought Latinos into the program, and out of that program there was Assemblyman Gwen Moore, Assemblywoman Teresa Hughes, Assemblyman Bill Greene, Councilman Richard Alatorre, and Art Torres [Arthur Torres] was not part of the program, but he worked for me around that period. He is now chairman of the Democratic Party, and Joe Serna [Jr.], first Latino mayor of Sacramento [California], now deceased, so we integrated the whole program, and that's what I want to do again, but in the Senate, I had the Dymally adoption bill, in which the state gave a subsidy to adopt hard-to-place children. I was someplace recently and a woman said, "Mr. Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally], I used to run the Dymally adoption bill while I was with the county." So what the state did, you adopt a child and they give you the same subsidy that they would have given the foster care, except now they have a parent, yeah. So, that was important. Child abuse prevention, early childhood education, child growth and development, the eighteen year olds, equal rights for women. I became chairman of the Democratic Caucus, created the first Latino center district in California. Story_ID: 571537 Speaker 1: That's quite a legacy. So that was--anything else about the California State Senate? Speaker 2: Well, the California Senate is probably the first time I had an experience of political equality. I was chairman of the Democratic Caucus and I had some power. For the first time, I was part of the power elite in the Senate, and I became chairman of the Reapportionment Committee, because I came from a district where I could not be easily defeated and could do some very tough things; in fact, I came close to being censured by the old timers. I won by one vote, because I, for the first time in California and the United States, I eliminated a white district. I made a Latino district and the old timers were just po'd with me. So--that was an interesting thing that I did. And I was very much into Cesar Chavez and from there, I was, I became chairman of the Elections and Reapportionment Committee and my staff wanted me to run for [U.S.] Congress; in fact, we drew a new congressional district for Yvonne Burke, then Yvonne Brathwaite [HistoryMaker Yvonne Brathwaite Burke]. A friend of mine from Georgia, who worked for Governor Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], and whom I met during the [Hubert] Humphrey campaign--by the way, if you really want to know if you're in, in a presidential campaign, ask yourself am I flying in the plane with the president, presidential candidate? If you're not, you're out. If you're on that plane, you're in. I was on the Humphrey plane, you know, up front with him. But anyhow-- Speaker 1: This was '68 [1968] right? Speaker 2: In '68 [1968]. But anyhow, I almost lost my train of thought. Yeah, so we, I had this sense of power, chair of the Reapportionment Committee, chair of the Democratic Caucus, you know, and shared in some of the leadership. Now, we were a bunch of young reformers and decided to take over the Senate. I call one of the more moderate and cultured members, cultured in the sense he was kind of quiet, Jim Mills, and I said, "Jim, you're going to be in the next pro tem." He says, "No way." He says, "The lobbyists don't like me, you know, I don't vote for them." I said, "Well, Jim, I've got ten votes. You need one more vote and I know where that one vote is coming from." He said, "Where?" I said, "My seatmate [Senator Alfred H. Song]." By the way, I have a witness to this; a guy named Allen Rosen [ph.], who overheard this conversation who was consultant to the Reapportionment Committee, and so I called a meeting of the Senate Democratic Caucus at the International Hotel at LAX [Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles, California] and the old timers agreed, decide not to come. So the eleven of us made up the majority of twenty-one. We decided to call a meeting anyway, eleven of us were going to meet and the others heard about it and they came. We would vote eleven to ten to dump the old guard and reform the Senate. So that was part of my legacy. Story_ID: 571538 Speaker 1: One day, I was down at the African American Resource Center, it's a refugee center for Africans, and the director gave me this copy of an audit by the state auditor on the Dymally-Alatorre Bilingual Services Act [of 1973], but when I introduced the legislation with Assemblyman [Richard] Alatorre, it was designed for Mexicans, but since then Asians and even Africans have taken the bill 'cause the bill mandates that the state provide bilingual services to its constituents and this auditor claimed that the many agencies were not living up to the act. So, that was a Latino caucuses since taken it up and run with it and it was just like that. I had a great time in the [California State] Senate. And while there, I decided to, there was a lot of racism there, you know, because of the old-timers, first time a black was in the Senate, and very unorthodox, not following the rules of the old guard. I got to thinking what would happen if I had to leave here. What would I do? With a bachelor's [degree]? C'mon. Let's be serious. Then shortly I got my master's [degree]. And then, so, yes, I was saying that this friend, yes, Travis Stewart, from Atlanta [Georgia], was in town. Staff and I were meeting at the house and I said "Travis, you good old southern boy, my wife [Alice Gueno Dymally] is cooking some short ribs and greens, why don't you come and have dinner?" So he came to have dinner and the staff is talking about running for [U.S.] Congress, and he said, look. He was working for Hoffmann-La Roche [F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd.], a major Swedish, no Swiss drug firm. I had been all over the country and they said "Mervyn [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally] is ready to run for state wide office." So, we chose lieutenant governor because we figured it's such an invisible office, nobody cared. You know, they're not gonna go after me. It's not an office with a lot of power and thus it's how I happened to end up as lieutenant governor. Speaker 2: Okay, now, did you have to--so you did have much opposition, I guess-- Speaker 1: Well, I had a free ride, and the same guy whose district I eliminated for Latino District, Larry Walsh, ran against me, you know, and we won handsomely. But, in the meantime, the lieutenant governor, the Republican lieutenant governor resigned. Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] appointed one of my colleagues and, at one point, his campaign people had my picture on their literature to show the comparison. The media came to me, "Hey Dymally, you think that he's trying to emphasize race?" I said, "I don't know, but I think it's a helluva good looking picture." (Laughter) So I humored it, you know, rather than accuse them of racism and make, give them another story. Speaker 2: So, this is when Ronald Reagan was the governor. He became the governor in '74 [1974]. Speaker 1: Yes, this is in '74 [1974], okay. Speaker 2: You're lieutenant governor, so you have a democratic-- Speaker 1: Oh, no, this is '74 [1974], now Reagan is going out. Speaker 2: He's on his way out, okay. Speaker 1: Jerry Brown is in. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So I ran with Jerry Brown, yes. Speaker 2: Okay, so California is not one of those states where you can have a lieutenant governor that's a different party-- Speaker 1: That's correct. Attempts to change it have failed. New York, they run on the same ticket. Speaker 2: Okay, so you're in Jerry Brown's center to governor. Speaker 1: Well, I wouldn't say I was in with Jerry Brown; I mean, like I run my own campaign, okay, yes, and he ran his own campaign and I won, yeah, but they were miserable years though, 'cause the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] stayed on my case. Speaker 2: Now, why were they on your case? Speaker 1: Well, when I find out I'll tell you. I do not know. I think, I speculate that there was fear that I might become governor. They hounded the hell out of me, and convened a grand jury here. They couldn't find anybody to testify against me, and leaked information to a CBS reporter, commentator, that I was going to be indicted two weeks before the campaign and I remember him dramatically saying, "I said it, you heard it, Dymally knows it, he'll be indicted." I was on my way to Orange County [California], on 405, Highway 405. I said to my campaign chairman, campaign director, Ken Orduna, "It's all over, don't make any more debts. Pay off all our bills." His friend loaned me his jet flew all over the state having a good time and it was hopeless, so I was defeated. And so I am now in Sacramento [California] commuting to Los Angeles [California]. I said to my wife, you know, this is too expensive. We might as well move down, sell the condo, just move back to Los Angeles. Story_ID: 571539 Speaker 1: And I was on my way to Trinidad [and Tobago] to pursue representing Trinidad Steel Mill here in California where they had a big plant, and the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] leaked information to The Wall Street Journal that I was going to be indicted, so folks in Trinidad would not return my phone calls, but on my way there, trying to save this contract at a reception in Compton [California] and councilman there, the senior councilman, Maxcy D. Filer, said to me, "You ought to run for [U.S.] Congress in this district." And I said to him, "Look, I drew the lines on this district, and I did my doctoral dissertation on districts with 20 percent blacks. This district did not fit into that category." And he said to me, "That's what? Ten years ago? Things have changed." So, I went to Trinidad and then when I came back I took my campaign manager and my son [Mark Dymally], and we went and parked in front of high schools to see who is coming out there, and there weren't any white kids coming out. Latinos, Asians, blacks, and then we went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and did a study on the voting pattern of that district. The voting pattern was all liberal, even supporting Cesar Chavez, except for the famous, infamous proposition thirteen, in which the conservatives here froze any tax increases in school districts in the cities, and they voted for that, which led me to believe that they were middle class homeowners, that I could communicate with them, and so I run against an incumbent who was involved in Koreagate. Another retired incumbent, white, moved into the district and the two of them were doing battle while I just emphasized my presence in the black community and won. Speaker 2: Now, what was Koreagate? I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Koreagate is Tongsun Park had been passing out money in envelopes for influence spending in Congress. Speaker 2: Okay. Now, so let me back track a little bit. Again, you were, you were elected lieutenant governor in '74 [1974], right? Speaker 1: That's correct. Speaker 2: I have here the note on a card that I got from you that you were acting governor at one point in '76 [1976?] Speaker 1: Yes, yes. [Governor] Jerry Brown was in '76 [1976], remember he was running for president? And I became acting governor, yes. Speaker 2: Okay, so you were acting governor-- Speaker 1: Oh, oh, and my famous act then was to refuse to extradite the young man to Georgia who was guilty of stealing eleven dollars of candy got damn near lifetime sentence. He escaped, came to California. He was, his girlfriend and he got scared that he would be caught. They went to the police. They got arrested. I refused to--he got arrested. I refused to extradite him, and-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: There were all reasons at work. You know, the police chief tried to defy my orders. We had to go to court and force him to release the kid. You know, he wouldn't obey my order to not extradite. Subsequently, since I've been retired, he was riding his bicycle without lights, police arrested him. The district attorney down there had said during the time that he was arrested here that they weren't interested in the case anymore, but that never got into the computer system. So, they informed Georgia, Georgia said, we want him, we've got a famous attorney here, Leo Branton [HistoryMaker Leo Branton, Jr.], we went to superior court, agreed with us, the attorney general appeal went to the district court appeal and we lost two to one. They extradited him back to Georgia and lo and behold, who shows up in my office about two months ago? He was released, yeah. Speaker 2: So, this is a protracted struggle over eleven dollars' worth of candy? Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Okay. All right, so congressional election of 1980, you kind of slipped between two white candidates. Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 2: And you were able to win. Speaker 1: Yeah. Story_ID: 571540 Speaker 1: Well, tell us about you term in [U.S.] Congress, your terms in Congress. Speaker 2: Well, the most productive part of my career was in the [California State] Senate, because in California, in the California [State] Legislature, you can actually get things done as a freshman, not so in Congress. But, anyhow, I went in the Foreign Affairs Committee and took an interest in Africa. I subsequently chaired the Congressional Black Caucus. But in Congress, you can't boast as you can in California, of having a string of successes with legislation because it's absorbed by the committee, or the chairman takes the legislation. So mine was really one of continuing the work of Charlie Diggs [Congressman Charles Diggs]. Speaker 1: Okay, so you succeeded Charlie Diggs and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, someone from Chicago [Illinois]--this will be of interest to you. One day, I was told that Congressman Charlie Diggs now retired. Speaker 1: From Detroit [Michigan], right? Speaker 2: Yes. He asked me if I would meet with Prince Asiel [Ben Israel]. So I'm looking for some Arab, and here this brother shows up in an Italian suit, belongs to the Black Hebrews [African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem]. You're familiar with them. Speaker 1: Yeah, they call themselves the original Hebrews, or like, Nation of Jerusalem. Speaker 2: In Dimona. Speaker 1: In Dimona, Israel, Chicago in different cities. Speaker 2: He said to me he was problems with Israelis. They would not recognize them, the state department [U.S. Department of State], you know, and Charlie Diggs had said if you want to get something done, go see Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally]. So, I started. I met maybe about four prime ministers. [Shimon] Peres, the Knesset appointed a committee to look at their situation and, the Glass committee, the name of the member of the Knesset, [David] Glass. Speaker 1: Let's go back a little bit and kind of explain what this is for those watching, who are looking at this. They may or may not understand the situation about the Prince Asiel's group, African American based group, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was a group in Chicago that left and migrated to Liberia. In Liberia, they were welcomed by the president, [President William Richard] Tolbert [Jr.], and then when [Samuel] Doe took over, he regarded them as adversaries, and there developed a friction between Doe and them, and they decide that as Hebrews they were entitled to go back to Israel under the law of return. Under the law of return, if you are a Jew, any part of the world, you can go to Israel without a passport and you can live there, but Israelis refused to accept them as returnees. It went to the [U.S.] Supreme Court, and the lost the case. They developed an adversarial relationship between Israelis and them, and Israelis put them in a former settlement camp in Dimona where the nuclear plant [Negev Nuclear Research Center] is located. Speaker 1: That's right. It's a nuclear site. Speaker 2: And so, they came to me and I went, finally went to Begin [Prime Minister Menachem Begin] and Shamir [Yitzhak Shamir] and finally ended up with Peres, and Peres said to the director of the Ministry of the Interior, which is always run by an Orthodox Jew, "Why haven't we implemented the Glass Report?" And he said, "Sir, we will do that." Now, I come home and the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] said they'd like to talk with me and they said to me, "We understand you met with the prime minister and an alderman from Chicago, and he said that they should implement the Glass Report, but there was a broadcast on the Israeli Army Radio in Hebrew which said that Peres rejected you. Just the opposite of what happened. Just gives you an idea of propaganda. He said, "What really happened?" And I told him. "He said," you know, told them, told the director, "to implement the Glass Report." So, I'm struggling. Story_ID: 571541 Speaker 1: [James] Baker, Secretary of State Baker, was supposed to appear before my committee. I told you earlier I was chair of the Subcommittee on International Operations [and Organizations], which had oversight responsibility of the state department [U.S. Department of State], and he asked me, because of a death in the family, to postpone a meeting. No problem. Next thing I know, the staff is running back and forth looking for me in the office. Air Force One is calling. "Air Force One?" "Yes. Is this Congressman Dymally [HistoryMaker Mervyn M. Dymally]?" "Yes." "The president would like to speak with you." The president, thanked me. So I figure now I've got a blue chip with Baker. Speaker 2: So, this is [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan you're talking to? Speaker 1: No, this is Bush, father Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush]. So, yeah, I got a blue chip with Baker, not to mention the fact that he got the president to appoint me as a congressional representative to the United Nations [UN]. Baker and I developed a good relationship. So I go to him and I say, I need help with the Hebrews [African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem]. It happened on the day that I called a meeting. Rabbi [David N.] Saperstein, who was always for reconciliation in Washington [D.C.], the wife [Annette Tilleman Lantos] of Congressman [Tom] Lantos, who was for reconciliation. The director of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was in Washington that day, and so I assembled all of these people and we came to, I had said previously that Israelis will never settle this until we give them some money to settle the dispute they have with the Hebrews. And, at the time, there was this beautiful black woman from Chicago [Illinois] who was assistant secretary for refugees. I forgot her name now, had a sort of a French name. Her son [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Jr.] is in the banking business. Lafollette. Is it Lafollette? No? Speaker 2: No--it's, I just had it on the tip of my tongue (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She's passed away since. Speaker 2: Yes, right, right, she has. Speaker 1: And she was in charge of refugees. So, we agreed-- Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Jewel Lafontant-MANkarious, Jewel Lafontant. Speaker 1: Lafontant. So we agreed that the [U.S.] Congress would give the Israelis some money to pay for the debt. They claimed that the Hebrews owed them $250,000 to build a school which was built. The state department would restore their passport because they had burnt their passports and an American lawyer cannot deport somebody back to the United States without a passport. The airlines are not supposed to take them on. And the Israelis would give them a work permit. The Israelis just before that had agreed with the [U.S.] Department of Justice to deport as many of them as possible. And they began arresting all of the breadwinners in the family. They released them, gave them work permits. Just last week, Prince Asiel [Ben Israel] was out here thanking me for my work in Israel. They are now building some new housing in Dimona [Israel]. They have the largest tofu ice cream plant in Israel. They have a band entertain the troops, et cetera, et cetera. So--that was part of the work that I did that these people now have passports. They could travel back and forth and they are mindful of my effort there. Story_ID: 571542 Speaker 1: We were just concluding the comments about the Hebrew-Israelite nation [African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem] and-- Speaker 2: Yes, so anyhow they're settled now. You know, they travel back and forth and they're building a whole new village now. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, now this was during the [President George Herbert Walker] Bush administration. It's like from '88 to '92 [1988 to 1992], I guess [sic. early 1980s]. Speaker 2: Yes. I did not serve under [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton. Speaker 1: Now, you were chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus. Speaker 2: Yes, for two years. Speaker 1: From '86 [1986], '87 [1987]? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so, yeah. Speaker 1: Well, tell me about that. This is an institution that is somewhat-- Speaker 2: Well, what I tried to do is put an emphasis on science and technology and I got some funding from the head of the National Science Foundation, who subsequently became president of Occidental College [Los Angeles, California], whose name [HistoryMaker John Slaughter] I forgot now, to develop a science advisory council at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and I was awarded, given an award by the historically black colleges [HBCUs] for my emphasis, trying to inject science and technology. I had some minor success with Congressman Al Gore and that committee, science and tech committee, but there was a lot of legislation and then the [Newt] Gingrich influence was creeping in the [U.S.] Congress. It was not a very productive tenure and I got burnt out travelling back and forth coming every weekend, yeah. Speaker 1: So, you came all the way back out here every weekend? Speaker 2: Always, always. Speaker 1: That must have been rough. Speaker 2: Very hard on Californians, and one of the dilemmas one faces from California is if you take your family to Washington [D.C.], you don't see them most of the time because you get home late, you know, after all these cocktail parties. You come out here on weekends, they're there. If you leave them here, then they're not with you during the week. And when you come home, your schedule over-schedules you. You know, it's not like New York where you could run up on a Wednesday evening for dinner and come back, you know. So, I got burnt out. You know, it wasn't, in my judgment, a very productive relationship. This when I'm back in the [California State] Assembly as the oldest new member there, and already we've gotten African American Political Institute commission to preserve African American history and culture. The governor vetoed that, a commission to observe the Brown versus Topeka [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. For the first time in California's history, we got legislation to define discrimination as opposed to proposition 209, which eliminated affirmative action. You know, so you can get some stuff done. Story_ID: 571543 Speaker 1: Tell us about this, though, before we leave [U.S.] Congress. You were, you were chairman of the African Subcommittee of the Foreign Relations Committee? Speaker 2: Yeah, I visited forty-two African countries, you know, honored by about six. I tried to develop relationships, some of it which were misunderstood; for instance, the state department [U.S. Department of State] heard that I knew Mobutu [Sese Seko] and tried to get in to sponsor one of these Franco Democratic conferences that were sweeping Franco Africa, and I did get in to put the conference together, but there was a lobbying group the rainbow lobbyists- went after me with a hatchet (laughter). They took me to court and the whole thing, but my position was I did not obviously support Mobuto. I wanted to know, what were we doing there? What was he doing? There was rumor with some credibility that Savimbi was permitted to use a base in Zaire to go on to Angola, so-- Speaker 1: It's Jonas Savimbi, yeah, who actually-- Speaker 2: I wanted to kind of find out what the heck was going on, but you know, I also had a meeting with Ms. [Prime Minister] Indira Gandhi, got to know [Prime Minister] Rajiv Ghandi on a personal basis, spent twenty-five and a half hours with [Prime Minister] Fidel Castro, all of which came to Q and A books, got a child released from Cuba to her parents here in Los Angeles [California], got a prisoner released by the Iranian opposition back into the district, Bellflower [California], you know, and got the [U.S.] Supreme Court justice released from jail by [Samuel] Doe, you know, so that's the sort of thing I did, but I did not seek publicity for these things, you know. I just did it, I accepted the peace award in Brazil for [Nelson] Mandela, flew to Soweto [Johannesburg, South Africa], gave it to his wife [Winnie Mandela] while he was in--tried to go see him, but the African government wouldn't permit me to go see him in prison. Speaker 1: Okay, so you followed him and tried to complete some of the work of Congressman [Charles] Diggs. Speaker 2: Yes, yes. In fact, he and I had a little friendly rivalry. I said, "Look, Charlie, I'm gonna beat you. You visited fifty-one of the fifty-two countries. I'm gonna do all fifty-two" (laughter). But I nev--I made forty-two. I still want to--my ambition, if you ask me what's my future ambition, it's to make those fift--those other ten. Speaker 1: Okay. So, you didn't run for Congress again. You just didn't run again or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In '92 [1992] yeah. Speaker 1: In '92 [1992]. Story_ID: 571544 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Then I was retired and then I was a visiting professor at Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and at Charles R. Drew Medical University [Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science, Los Angeles, California], in the district here. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: And then, this district came up after reapportionment in '91 [1991] and I was looking for a candidate to run here and couldn't get any takers and so everybody kept saying you ought to run, and here I am. Speaker 2: Was this in 2001, you mean? Speaker 1: Yeah. Here I am (laughter), back to the future. Speaker 2: And you were elected in 2003, right? Speaker 1: In 2002, took office in 2003. Speaker 2: Okay, okay, all right. So you're going back to your roots, basically. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Back to my roots. And I'm enjoying it. You know, we--our big challenge now is trying to save the Drew Medical Center [Martin Luther King Jr./Drew Medical Center; Martin Luther King Jr. Outpatient Center, Los Angeles, California] from being dismantled by the [Los Angeles] County Board of Supervisors. Speaker 2: It's probably--Drew Medical Center and most of these that have a black population, I know we have one in Dayton [Ohio], Charles Drew Medical Center [Dr. Charles R. Drew Health Center]. Speaker 1: Is that right? Yes, uh-huh. Speaker 2: People just, it's kind of an extension of history, I guess. So, yeah, that is the bigger issue right now. There's a meeting today about that, right? Speaker 1: Big, big issue today. Big rally today; in fact, as I speak to you now the Baptist ministers were trying to get me to come to their rally, but I had this appointment booked for months. Speaker 2: So, you were telling me when I came in that the board of governors in Drew Medical Center, or what was it, the-- Speaker 1: The King Drew Medical Center is made up of the King Hospital, named after [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], and was put together by a white supervisor by the name of Kenny Hahn [Kenneth Hahn], and the Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science was put together by some black doctors. The two of them merged on paper. The hospital was funded by the county. The university was funded by the state, and it's a teaching hospital, so the two are inextricably tied together. The county has been downgrading in the hospital systematically and there have been a number of departments, not a number, a couple of departments which have lost their accreditation. The county took over management a year ago and the situation got worse. So now, in order to save the injured left leg, they want to cut off the uninjured right leg. They want to close the trauma center, which caters to over two thousand patients a year, and take that money and put it in a private hospital, which does not now have a trauma center, and so the community is up in arms. I don't recall this community being united around any other issue as this one since the Civil Rights Movement. Speaker 2: So, they violated two laws. Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. They violated the Brown Act [Ralph M. Brown Act of 1953], which says in California, you cannot hold public affairs meetings secretly, and the Beilenson Act says before a hospital is closed, you must have a public hearing, or any portion thereof. But, they made the decision in private and now they have come in to rub our heads with an outrageous meeting today. Speaker 2: Okay, so what do your chances look like? Speaker 1: They've made up their minds already, four to one, to close the trauma center, and we're trying to see if public pressure, we have a combination of black and Latino legislators supporting our effort to keep the trauma center, and we're going to court, I think, today to get a restraining order so that they can't slow us down. There has been precedent for this. Speaker 2: So, it's a fight basically. We don't know-- Speaker 1: Big fight, big fight. Speaker 2: We don't know how it's gonna turn out, but-- Speaker 1: It's us against them. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Them being four supervisors, two Democrats and two Republicans, one Latino, one Jew, and two WASPs [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant]. Story_ID: 571545 Speaker 1: We didn't discuss your presidential appointment to the United Nations [UN]. We didn't discuss that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I was appointed by President [George Herbert Walker] Bush as a U.S. congressional rep [representative] to the United Nations. That was kind of an interesting experience, you know. I'd go up there every Friday, lasted for two years, every Friday. I had an office at the UN mission, you know, and I met with ambassadors from various countries. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: One of my exploits was to go to Libya and meet [Prime Minister Muammar] Gaddafi, to release two children who were taken by their father from Brooklyn [New York] to Egypt, and in those days you could cross into the Libyan border without any fuss, and they were supposed to be hiding. The father was supposed to be hiding them. I actually met with him and they wanted to work a deal with me which I could not deliver. That is that the United States open up a dialog with them and in return they will help try to find the child, the children. Speaker 1: Now, these are two black children, right? Speaker 2: No, they were white children. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. There's a similar story I heard about, I guess, I don't know if the woman was from California or someplace on the West Coast, where her husband took two children to someplace in the Middle East, I think. Speaker 2: I was not successful, but I had a chance to meet him. Also, I was in Singapore attending a conference with Swamiji [Swami Prakashanand Saraswati] on peace and religion and after the conference, he asked me when was I leaving and I said tomorrow, and he said, "So am I. What plane?" I said, "Singapore." He said, "So am I. Why don't you--I'm stopping in Dubai [United Arab Emirates]. Why don't you stop with me?" I had not been to a desert Middle East Arabian country, so hey, thought it would be a good opportunity. I went there. As I usually do, I go visit the embassy. The ambassador was not there, Sharjah Fares [ph.], said I wanted you to go meet the minister of planning, who was the former United Arab Emirates ambassador to the United States. I go there and he's late and he comes in apologizing for being late because he was meeting with the chairman. Well, I knew in the Middle East, when you talk about the chairman, you're talking about [Yasser] Arafat. So, I here said to him naively, "Is Arafat in town?" And he said, "Yes, would you like to meet him?" Well, frankly I was too chicken to say no because I figured you say no, he'll say, "Here goes one of these frightened Americans." If I say yes, I'll never see Arafat, 'cause Arafat, who wants to see a freshman congressman. The next thing I know, we're running back and forth getting things ready. The chairman is ready to see you. (Laughter) (Unclear) we pulled the flag off the car, told the driver drop me and just don't stay, leave, you know. And he took me in this, I was reading the other day where someone said whenever you met Arafat there was always a big feast, and indeed there was, a long table with lamb and the whole bit and I met him. I'm coming outside and there's a camera, and all they asked me was this. Did you see the chairman, yes? That's all. At 11:05, California time, Peter Jennings broadcasts from London [England]-- Story_ID: 571546 Speaker 1: At 11:05 from London [England], Peter Jennings broadcast that a freshman congressman, [HistoryMaker] Mervyn [M.] Dymally, had just broken the [Henry] Kissinger rule of no conversation with [Chairman Yasser] Arafat. I had a Jewish woman working for me, a former teacher, AFT, American Federation of Teachers, she and I go all the way back. She worked on my campaign as a volunteer. Quit, on the spot. No one believed that I met Arafat by accident in the desert. A friend of mine, big fundraiser said, his name is Barry [ph.], Barry said, "There's no way in the world, Dymally, you can go to the United Arab Emirates in the desert and meet Arafat without prior arrangement. The security is too rigid." I said man. Nobody believed me. (Laughter) I lost a lot of my poor Israeli friends. Just putting it back together now. Speaker 2: So, a serendipitous meeting with Arafat. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Subsequently after my retirement, he was sent to me to talk to me, for me to brief him on what's going on in the United States, and then when he came to Virginia to meet with [President William Jefferson "Bill"] Clinton at the White House [Washington, D.C.], I also met him. Speaker 2: What was he like? He's just passed away. Speaker 1: These guys, very charismatic, you know, like when the Koreans found out I was going to Cuba, they asked me if I could ask [Prime Minister] Fidel [Castro] if he were gonna join the Olympics. He gave me a half an hour lecture on the Olympics, very brilliant guy. I mean, he knows American history like the textbook, and for each criticism or the violation of human rights, he could site you a similar violation of the United States. But, Arafat, Fidel, and Mrs. [Prime Minister Indira] Gandhi and her son [Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi] were the more fascinating people that I met as I travelled around. Speaker 2: Okay. Let's see. Speaker 1: I met [Nelson] Mandela, but I did not have the discourse with Mandela as I did with these one-on-one meetings, you know, just myself and them. Nobody was in between us. For Mandela, I was always in a crowd, you know? Speaker 2: Now, did you know Mobutu [Sese Seko]? Speaker 1: Yes, um-hm. Speaker 2: What was he like? Speaker 1: My interests in Mobutu was to see how a dictator operates. You know, that was, I had an academic interest because I was thinking about teaching or writing a book about my experiences and I wanted to see how does a dictator operate. It was a very fascinating experience. A dictator is a dictator is a dictator. I mean, he gets on the phone and boom, you know. He calls up, it's done. I remember one time, he was having a reception for a friend of mine and this friend didn't want another one of my friends to come to the reception. He might have taken away something from him and when Mobutu found out about it, he held a new reception for my friend. So, you know, I mean, the thing about those dictators that really tears me apart is that they have no sense of commitment to eliminate poverty. You know, poverty is a matter of fact and as they steal the money, they do not open up a hospital. They don't have a sense of philanthropy as we do in the United States. Take the most critical institution here now is Wal-Mart, but they have a foundation. They support charter schools, et cetera, et cetera. So, even the most critical institution here has some charitable arm, not so with these dictators. They take it all. And it's so, they take so much, and they don't give enough. There's a lot of poverty there; but, poverty there is seen in a different light than here. Poverty here is seen in homelessness. You don't see that there because everyone has a place, a heart or someplace or family. They still have a sense of family and a lot of ground provisions to eat, you know, they grow their crops. They are poor because they have no money. But, they're not on the streets as our homeless poor are. Story_ID: 571547 Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: Well, we're in crisis politically. We have a decline in, at least in California numbers that we are experiencing. We don't have a sense of deep commitment. The closest we have gotten to it in California is the King/Drew Medical Center [Martin Luther King Jr./Drew Medical Center; Martin Luther King Jr. Outpatient Center, Los Angeles, California], because of its history it was borne out of the ashes of the Watts riots. We need to put an agenda together and in that respect, I'm trying to do that next year. We're going to have a legislative black caucus weekend patterned after the Congressional Black Caucus weekend to see if we could bring this family and I've been going to different cities. During the recall campaign I went to twenty cities, campaign against recall now, during this campaign here I went to ten cities, and each one of these cities I organized a support group, the last one of which was last week here in Los Angeles [California]. I'm gonna do two more, one in Oakland [California] and one in Palo Alto [California]. Story_ID: 571548 Speaker 1: You told me to ask you about Chris Edley [Christopher Edley, Sr.] and the Joint-- Speaker 2: Chris Edley, yeah, so--I called a meeting of black elected officials at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]. Why the University of Chicago? Because I was a fellow-- Speaker 1: When is this, I'm sorry. Speaker 2: We are in about '67 [1967]. I'm in the [California State] Senate. Why Chicago? Because I was a fellow at the Metropolitan Applied Research Institute run by Dr. Kenneth Clark. He knew Chris Edley. He was vice chancellor for public affairs at the University of Chicago [sic.]. And so, I called this meeting together and Percy Sutton, president of the borough of Manhattan [New York, New York], because quite curious as to who is this guy, anyway? I never heard of him. So, we met in Chicago [Illinois] and I told him what it was about and we got funded by Ford [Foundation], Rockefeller [Foundation], Twentieth Century [Fund; The Century Foundation], to put this conference together. And then I went back to Percy and said we need to put together a think tank. Clark, who was consultant to the Ford Foundation, took us to the Ford Foundation, and Chris Edley was assigned to put together this proposal, Chris Edley the father, the son [Christopher Edley, Jr.] is now at Berkeley as a dean of the law school [University of California Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California], and Chris wanted to do something for Howard University [Washington, D.C.], so here you had the black elected officials, the joint center for, I'm sorry, the Metropolitan Applied Research Center, Howard University. These three institutions, thus the name the Joint Center. That's how it became the Joint Center [for Political Studies; Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies, Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 1: Okay. So that's the birth of the Joint Center. Speaker 2: Yes. That's the birth of the Joint Center. You may hear other stories. I'm just telling you, you hear it from the horse's mouth. And, Newson, when we had this conference in Chicago, Senator Newson is the only one who showed up. Speaker 1: Oh, you mean [Senator] Richard Newhouse? Speaker 2: Yes. I said Newton--Newhouse. Speaker 1: Newhouse of Chicago. Speaker 2: Subsequently I met some of the Daley boys and I said, you know, why didn't you guys show up? He said like look, man--we got a gig in Springfield [Illinois]. We got a gig in Chicago. We got a gig in a precinct. We don't want to offend this guy. You know, we'll be gone, you know. So, it was borne the Joint Center for Political Studies, now it changed to economic because there's a realization now in the movement that you can't do the movement without the economy. So, most of this emphasis now is on the economy; politics and the economy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So, you know, we've suffered some setbacks since Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] has left, Bush I [President George Herbert Walker Bush] and Bush II [President George Walker Bush]. So, we have to put it together. It's going to depend on a large measure and what the Congressional Black Caucus does in Washington [D.C.] and black elected officials around the state put together. Speaker 1: See, you're trying to form something similar to a Joint Center here in California, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, we do have the California State University of Dominguez [Hills, Carson, California], and Institute of African American Politics [African American Political and Economic Institute; Mervyn M. Dymally African American Political & Economic Institute]. Why the college? Because that's how the Joint Center started. Because the only way you can get state funds is if you are affiliated to a university. So, if we had gone independent, trying to raise money now is difficult, period. So you have to team up with a university. Story_ID: 571549 Speaker 1: Tell me now, when you look back at all that you've done and your career in politics and in the education of the world, would you do anything differently, anything major? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd be a little more cautious, not less liberal, but a little more cautious because I took up every cause. If you pick up the Los Angeles Times, you could find two good stories about me and maybe one that you saw today. This is about the first time I got a front page story that wasn't negative in the Times. In each instance, I was trying to help somebody else, you know. Never afraid to come to defense of someone in prison or someone in trouble. Some of that rubs off on you and the press is very unkind to politicians who stick their neck out. Story_ID: 571550 Speaker 1: Did your parents [Andreide Richardson Dymally and Hamid Dymally] get a chance to see you become a successful politician? Speaker 2: Yeah, my father and mother, yes. Yeah, they saw me up to the [California State] Senate; no, up to lieutenant governor. Yes. Speaker 1: You alluded earlier to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, but one bad experience I had. After I retired in '92 [1992], I went back home to Trinidad, met with the prime minister [Prime Minister Patrick Manning], and he gave me an assignment and the assignment was to get some developers to develop the old naval base at Chaguaramas in Trinidad. What he didn't tell me and what his predecessors never told the people in Trinidad, it was part of the land lease agreement the [Winston] Churchill land lease agreement of ninety-nine years. Therefore the Americans still owned it. You couldn't go in there and just take the land, but he had, you know, the Prime Minister Eric Williams had made his career out of marching down there to take the land back and the people never knew they couldn't (laughter) so, subsequently I understand Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] went down there and gave them back the land. But anyhow, I did my assignment and didn't hear from him, so I went to see him and this time he took me into a room with a secretary taking notes, and I'm saying what's this all about? You know, and I said look, now, you know, the [Congressional] Black Caucus isn't happy with you West Indians because you don't hire blacks as your lobbyists. Well, we have a black. I said, "No, you've got a white form with a black honcho. So, in the meantime, the opposition was wooing me through a friend of mine who had come to Washington [D.C.] on human rights and went to the state department [U.S. Department of State]. They sent him to the Subcommittee on Human Rights [and International Organizations] that they consult and they said, "By the way, you've got a guy right here from Trinidad. Why don't you go see him? He's on the subcommittee." So he and I became friends and he encouraged me. So, after being snubbed by the leading party, PNM, People's National Movement, I went and joined the UNC, United National Congress. PNM is Afro with some token Indians. The UNC is Indian with some token Afros. So I joined there and they, every meeting, you know a great, great meetings. I mean, it's still, the drums and, you know, I mean it's just really exciting. And to all that I would visit, thirty-six constituencies, and every night I would open up the meetings. They'll introduce me, you know, as the former chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus, first black lieutenant governor and all that stuff, emphasizing to the people that here's this guy from Trinidad, went to the United States, came back and instead of going to the Afro parties with us, you know; and so what I said to them, "Look. Why don't you run Afro candidates?" Story_ID: 571551 Speaker 1: I told you before, if you're a (unclear) and you're successful, the Indians will accept you, you know. So, I had no problems about acceptance; in fact, I lived with the leader of the party [United National Congress], who subsequently became attorney general, okay, so, I worked my ass off. The date of the victory, the next day of the victory, I went down to the Cedros, Bonasse Village [Trinidad and Tobago] and I got a call. "You had written a report, a transition report, for the prime minister [Prime Minister Patrick Manning] and do you have a copy of it?" "Yes. I'll give it to you. What's going on?" "Oh well, we're meeting." What? You're meeting without me after all the work I did, came down here two months, got no pay, no room, no board, nothing, just an old car without air conditioning. So, they invited me for the next day. But, by the time I got there, they had cut up the pie. So the day of the swearing in of the prime minister and the attorney general to start the government, the prime minister leaves the president, who is related to me by the Indian side of my family, walks up to me in front of everybody and says to me, "Send me a proposal. I want you to represent me in the United States." But during the course of the campaign, there were all kinds of rumors that I was gonna be president, I'm gonna come back home and be a minister, I'm gonna be the lobbyist, and I sent him the proposal and didn't hear from him. I went down there. He wanted to see me in the Parliament. I said, "No. I'm not in for a show. I want to see you privately." Well, he said, "I want you to be on my honorary consul in California." I said, "I'm honorary consul already. From Benin it doesn't pay. You're not doing me any favor." Anyhow, they dropped me like a hot potato. Now, I go back to Trinidad and I said to the now attorney general, and we're still friends. "Hey man, why don't you stop this corruption?" And he did that, you know. I said, "Oh, okay." So, the thing got so bad that he bolted from the party, he and two other guys of conscience, and they had so--the majority party is now the minority party. They call a special election. They lost by one vote. So, the Afros are back in. So my guy, now the other day he called me and they wanted me to come back and resurrect the party, so my running here also was a form of vindication if to say to a country where a prophet has no honor, "Hey, look. You suckers wouldn't recognize me, give me due credit, but the folks in California still love me, you know." So, they are amazed at this type of guy, can't get rid of him (laughter), you know, he's like a bouncing ball. You bounce him and he keeps going up. So, so I am kind of on the outs now with them, but I'm going back there next month, but I don't intend to see them or intend to get involved anymore. Story_ID: 571552 Speaker 1: We didn't talk about Benin, either. We didn't talk about your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Benin is a small country, big as your finger. It's a little split between Togo and Nigeria, and after I was really close to the ambassador, Benin ambassador to the United States, and I had been to Benin, and there's a place called Wida [Benin], where the slaves assembled under a big tree before they march them to the water, so there was a big Wida festival there and I was honored along with head of [HistoryMaker] C. Payne Lucas, head of Africare. And so, after I left [U.S.] Congress, they appointed me as the honorary consul. It's an honorary job, that's exactly what it is. There's no pay and whatever expenses occur, you do it out of your pocket, you know, and Benin is not a place where people travel with any frequency as in the case with Nigeria or Ghana or the Ivory Coast or South Africa. And then, more recently the speaker appointed me as chief protocol officer for the [California State] Assembly, because we get a lot of visitors in California and one year some eighty countries visited Sacramento [California]. Speaker 1: Okay. And you're now--oh, yeah, the chief assembly protocol officer right, that was just recently. Speaker 2: Yeah. We have an office of protocol, a small office, in Sacramento, yeah. Story_ID: 571553 Speaker 1: Now, what would you consider at this point and when you look back on everything you've done, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy? Speaker 2: Bringing young people into the system and developing, looking at California as a state of diversity rather than just doing a totally black thing, you know, because California is a majority minority state. The majority of people are minorities in California. Story_ID: 571554 Speaker 1: What are your feelings about race in the United States, coming from a culture where you didn't really, that wasn't an issue in the very beginning? Speaker 2: Very troubling, very troubling. Racism is so much a part of American society. I guess, just the other day I was getting off the plane and the attendant, a white person, was ahead of me, she said, "Have a good day" and I came up and she said nothing to me. I go up at a pizza counter at the airport and I'm standing up there, white woman comes next to me. The attendant goes right to her and ignores me and I started laughing and he goes, "What are you laughing at?" I said, "Nothing." You know, the alternative was for me to cuss, you know, so--but in subtle ways you experience it now. There is no sign that's posted No Blacks Allowed, but it's there, you know. You see it and you experience it every day and the challenge you have is whether you fight it every day and go crazy, or you absorb some of it and whenever you have a chance, you stick it to them, you know. But it's there. This fight with the King/Drew Medical Center [Martin Luther King Jr./Drew Medical Center; Martin Luther King Jr. Outpatient Center, Los Angeles, California]. You can't help but think that race is a factor in this, to demolish this hospital, which has a reputation of training doctors for combat overseas, Iraq, Afghanistan. You're gonna take the money from this public hospital and give it to a private hospital. I mean, I can't figure that one out. I'm trying to figure it out and I'm losing some sleep on that one, but I don't think I could be elected lieutenant governor now. There's a hostile media, there's a hostile right wing. I was talking to Tony Beilenson [Anthony C. Beilenson] of the Beilenson Act. He authored the legislation for therapeutic abortion in California, which was signed by Governor Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], and he reminded me that of the seven votes he got in the Senate Judiciary Committee, five were Republicans and two Democrats, himself and Senator Al Song [Senator Alfred H. Song], who just passed away recently. That's the kind of bipartisan, the kind of legislation I got out: child abuse prevention, African history. I don't think I could get that passed now, and if I did, the governor vetoed a bill to create a commission to study to preserve African American culture, and he refused to make the appointments to the Brown versus Topeka commission, just, thus in fact killing it, and vetoed a bill which defined California rule in implanting 209 [proposition 209] and implanting a nondiscriminatory act, because in California it's still against the law to discriminate. Where 209 says I can't give you a job because you're black or Mexican, as the case may be, but it doesn't say I'm going to deny you a job because you're black. And, many administrators saw 209 as a mandate to discriminate. One community college didn't hire anyone for a year 'cause they didn't want to violate the law, but they were, in fact, violating the law by denying people the right to work. So, now the climate has changed considerably and you have to exercise a great deal of tolerance, you know, but do you get mad and, you know, just rant and rave or do you just wait your chance to do little things, incremental things. Speaker 1: And, nationally today even as we speak, as changes in the Bush [President George Walker Bush] administration. Bush was just elected last week, or the week before last, and now Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] has resigned and stuff, and--did you know Colin Powell when he was-- Speaker 2: He was the only national security officer who ever came to brief a Congressional Black Caucus in the twelve years that I was there, so I didn't have a chance to work with him as I did with Secretary [James] Baker, because he was in a National Security Council and they are kind of secretive about their operation. But, you know, a sense of pride that he was West Indian, that he was Jamaican, that he was black, but he was a hawk, you know, had to be by nature of his profession. He bombed his own people in Panama. He bombed the poorest section of Panama, which is populated by former Jamaicans, you know. He was in the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] when we invaded Grenada, left Grenada in shambles, in poverty, but that's his rule. Now, if you accept that as his role, you know, if you accept that as his role. He was not a Clarence Thomas, you know, but he was a career [U.S.] Army man and many of us are pacifists. We are opposed to war, you know. But, he was the most decent of that whole gang of hawks. At least, the world knew that he was for reconciliation and they will miss him because Condoleezza Rice is a hawk, absolute hawk from the Pentagon. Story_ID: 571555 Speaker 1: Is there anything that I haven't asked that you think we ought to discuss? Speaker 2: Well, why do we pursue anything in life? Is it for money? Is it for enjoyment? Is it for satisfaction? Is it for happiness? I've never made any, if you read the L.A. Times [Los Angeles Times], you'd think that I was the biggest crook in town, but I lived on my salary. I still do, 'cause politics is not a profession by which you could become rich and be honest at the same time, unless you had some ongoing enterprise before you got into politics. But, I'm enjoying myself and I'm happy doing what I'm doing, you know. I'm seventy-eight, I worry about my health, you know. Would I survive much longer, would I have a chance to complete some of the things that I do, I worry about that. I try to take good care of my health. I got slowed down going to the gym because I have a ruptured ligament, torn ligament in my knee, so I have not been able to walk as strongly as one needs to (background noise), but I'm enjoying life. You know, I live a very modest life. My wife [Alice Gueno Dymally] and I enjoy going out to dinners, not political dinners (laughter). She says she's had enough of that; private dinners, you know. And, going home to visit the village [Bonasse, Trinidad and Tobago]. I go down there and I'll be on the porch rocking, drinking a little rum and orange juice and eating some roti and what you call here bouillabaisse, we call fishti. There's a fish called carite. I like the tail and the head (laughter). So, life's been good to me. I'm--I, the white media have never given me credit for this, but, you know when you talk about Americana and you talk about success stories, here's a guy who comes from a fishing village and ends up as lieutenant governor, first black senator. You know, I made history. I don't wear that on my shoulders. You know, it's very immaterial. So, life goes on and you know--I'm enjoying it. I have some, I've been told that I have some close relationship with the speaker and the [California State] Assembly and there's a constant fight there because, since term limits the staff run the house, you know. They know you're gonna be gone and they're gonna be there, but you know, I try to see that we have jobs for people who are in need of, who are capable and in need of jobs, but my big project now is the black weekend, the [Congressional] Black Caucus weekend, trying to bring this family of African Californians together. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now, I must comment on this, that I know, this interview that you conduct, is very informal. Do you edit parts of the informality? Speaker 1: No, we don't really. Just keep it intact. Speaker 2: Very conversational. It's not rigid. I thought the UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] interview was more focused on particular items, et cetera. More historical rather than conversational as we were today; both of which are good, you know. All of my archives are at the California State [University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] library, the [John F.] Kennedy [Memorial] Library and I'm told that they have done a good job putting it together. Story_ID: 571556 Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: As someone who cared, who was, my tombstone, he was unafraid. That's all. Speaker 1: Okay, thank you sir. Speaker 2: Thank you very much...