 Story_ID: 269423 Speaker 1: This [The] HistoryMakers interview is being conducted with Dr. Kenneth C. Edelin [HistoryMaker Kenneth Carlton Edelin], professor of obstetrics and gynecology and an associate dean of the Boston University School of Medicine in Boston, Massachusetts. The interview is being conducted at his home, at 43 Worthington Road, in Brookline, Massachusetts. The date is April 21, 2005. The interviewer is [HistoryMaker] Robert C. Hayden, and the videographer is Matthew Hickey. Dr. Mr. HistoryMaker, would you state your full name and spell your name for us? Speaker 2: Kenneth, K-E-N-N-E-T-H, Carlton, C-A-R-L-T-O-N, Edelin, E-D-E-L-I-N. Speaker 1: And, Dr. Edelin, when were you born and where? Speaker 2: March 31, 1939, Washington, D.C., Columbia Hospital for Women in fact. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: The only one of my parents' [Ruby Goodwin Edelin and Benedict Edelin] children who were, who was born in a hospital. Speaker 1: Okay. How do you described or label your occupation, your profession? Speaker 2: I'm a physician, an obstetrician gynecologist, and practiced medicine for, well over thirty years, responsible for the birth of, births of approximately 10,000 children in, in the City of Boston, and in England, and in Nashville, Tennessee. And, I say responsible for because I was chief of obstetrics and gynecology. And, I had overall responsibility for that many births, and signed the birth certificates of that many children who are here in Boston. And, I've had some of those children enter some of my educational programs. And, so we call it real continuity of care. Speaker 1: You have several positions at the Boston University School of Medicine. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Would you give us those positions and the affiliation within the School of Medicine? Speaker 2: All right. I am currently the associate dean for student and minority affairs. And, in that position, I run several programs. The one I'm probably most proudest of is early medical school selection program. By which we through a relationship with twelve HBCUs, historically black colleges and universities, and two Hispanic servicing institutions, accept students into medical school in their sophomore year of college. These are highly motivated, highly intelligent young people. I interview them all during their sophomore year. The program has been going on for about twenty years and it's been very successful. We have physicians who've gone through this program, gone through Boston University School of Medicine who are now practicing all over the country from Jackson, Mississippi to Toledo, Ohio, to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. And, even I have two of my graduates in Iraq, at the current time, serving their government as physicians in the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps]. The program has been extremely successful. We look at more than the usual predictors of success. We move beyond the numbers and the test scores, and we look at the individuals, their background, their motivation, their, their ability to focus on, on their mission, on their goals in life. And, we take young people that other people might consider to be at risk, and we help them achieve their goal of becoming a physician. And, I've been running that program now for about fifteen years. And, it has been very successful. And, we just had our--we accepted fifteen new sophomores into the program and they'll be spending their summer with us this summer. Next summer and they'll spend their entire senior undergraduate year with us at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] taking medical school courses while they are undergraduates, and getting credit toward their M.D. degree. So, it's a very innovative, successful program, which I'm happy to report is being copied by other medical schools across the country. Speaker 1: And you are professor of? Speaker 2: Professor of obstetrics and gynecology. That is my academic appointment. So, I teach. I stopped practicing about two years ago, so I no longer deliver babies. But, I teach, I teach medical students the art and practice of medicine. I concentrate now on the whole area of health disparities because that has always been a passion and an interest of mine going back to the years, even, even before I went to medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] about the difference in health outcomes. And, then as an obstetrician gynecologist especially in Boston. The whole issue of infant mortality and the different rate of deaths of babies during their first year of life between blacks and non-blacks. And, that has been a keen interest and passion of mine to try and, and reduce that gap and try and reduce the rate at which black babies die in the first--first year of life. Story_ID: 269424 Speaker 1: Well, thank you for that introduction. Before we move on to talk about your family history-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: We have a few, what we call warm-up questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: People magazine type questions. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Which will give the viewers of your interview another little slant on your personality. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Aight. [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Kenneth Carlton] Edelin, what is your favorite food? Speaker 2: What's my favorite food; my favorite food is fried chicken. Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Red. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: And, do you have a favorite phrase or saying that you like to use from time to time? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: What is it? Speaker 2: If you keep on doing what you've always done, you're gonna keep on getting what you've always got. Story_ID: 269425 Speaker 1: Our interviews start, [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Kenneth Carlton] Edelin, by looking at a HistoryMaker's family. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: It's important to talk about parents, and grandparents, and siblings, and the important people in your family life as a background and a context for understanding your career development and who you are and what you are today. And, so, we'd like to start with your mother. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Would you give me her name, where she was born, and where she grew up? Speaker 2: My mother's name was Ruby Marguerite Goodwin. And, when she married my father [Benedict Edelin], her name became Edelin. The name Goodwin is a very interesting name. She was born in Washington, D.C., my mother. And, she was the third generation of, as they called in the day, colored women, to be born in the Washington, D.C. area. Both her mother and her grandmother were born in Washington, D.C. So, we go back many generations in that city. She was the second child of Richard Goodwin [ph.] and his wife, Elise Goodwin [ph.]. And, she grew up in Washington and went to the public schools in Washington; finished high school but never went to college. Met and married my father under some very interesting circumstances. And, they had four children, and they lived in Washington, D.C. all of their lives. Speaker 1: Your mother is deceased, right? Speaker 2: Yes. My mother died when I was eleven years old. Speaker 1: Okay. What stories did she share with you at a very young age that you might remember before she passed? Did she talk about her growing up years with you? Any stories of things that she handed on? Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was in a very interesting circumstance. There were seven years between me and my next oldest sibling. So, by the time I came along, my three older brothers and sisters were off in school during the day. So, I had her all to myself. And, so, we sent lots of time together and I remember and cherish those moments and those memories very dearly. The story she talked about were the stories about her family. She was extremely close to her father, and her mother. She and her mother used to talk on the early rotary dial phone, two or three times a day. They both lived in Washington, but not near each other. So, my memories of her are not so much of stories that she told. But, they are memories of she and I being home alone together; having that very precious time that I had with her, for such a brief period of time, for only eleven years of my life. Speaker 1: How do you remember her as a person; her personality? What was she like? Speaker 2: She was the anchor. She was the magnet. She was the oldest. She was the first to marry in her family. She was--she had the first grandchildren. So, people kind of gravitated to her for advice and for counsel. I remember--I have images of, on Friday and Saturday night all of her sisters and sisters-in-law would come over and she would kinda share with them her wisdom. She was the oldest girl. She was, I, I dare say, she was her father's favorite. He named her after his sister. But, she was the kind of keeper of wisdom and advice, and people looked to her. And, that was especially true during the Second World War [World War II, WWII] when her brothers were all fighting in the war. One in the [U.S.] Navy. Two in the [U.S.] Army. And, and they left their wives at home, and they had no other place to go. They had no other family, other than my mother and she would console them, and she would counsel them, and she would reassure them that everything was gonna, everything was gonna be all right. That their husbands, her brothers, would come home safely. Saturday night was also hair straightening night. It was a chair sit--sat by the gas stove, and the hot comb was put on the fire of the gas stove. And, the smell of burning hair and, and sulfur would kinda permeate the house because everybody came over on Saturday night to have Ruby do their hair. Story_ID: 269426 Speaker 1: Tell me about your maternal grandparents. Your grandmother, Elise Goodwin, and your grandfather, Richard [Goodwin (ph.)]; her parents. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You knew them? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, tell me about them. Where they were from; what you remember about them. Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather, I label or call as the keeper of stories and the teller of stories. And, it is from him that I remember very vividly many of the stories of his life and his family's life. And, I literally, remember sitting on the floor, at his feet, while he sat in a chair and would tell me the most wonderful stories about, well awful stories about growing up in Selma, Alabama, which is where his family was from. His father was born into slavery, got emancipated after the Civil War, became a farmer and a teamster. Had a team of horses that he drove throughout Dallas County, Alabama, selling his vegetables and wares. My father [sic. grandfather] grew up with three or four siblings. His mother died when he was very young. His father remarried. And, we remember--I remember the stories that he told about Selma, Alabama, which is recently in the news. And, is frequently in the news especially during the time of the Civil Rights Movement. But, Selma, Alabama was a very interesting southern city. It was the arsenal. It was where the Confederate Army kept large stocks of explosive and, and weapons. So, it was very prized by the Confederacy. And, one of the native sons of Selma was General Edmund Pettus from whom the bridge is named, and he was a Confederate general. And, after he was defeated in the war, after the Confederacy was defeated in the Civil War, he came back angry. Half of the population in Selma was "Negro." And, there was a lot of tension. There were, there were lynchings, there were shootings, there were, there were confrontations all the time. And, I remember the stories that he told me that his father shared with him about what it was like to grow up in the Deep South with such a strong hold of the Confederacy after the Civil War was over. And, the tension that existed between blacks and whites during those times. And, he, he vividly told me those stories. And, it was so bad that he, along with many others, at the beginning of the 20th century, drawing that Great Migration of people of the South who went north looking for a better life; to escape the imposition of all of the Jim Crow laws that were put in after Reconstruction to--for, for whites to reassert their power and control to restrict the movement of and, and the freedoms of black people in the South. And, he and his siblings decided to escape from that and went north. He went to Washington [D.C.]. He had another sibling that went to New York [New York], and another that went to Chicago [Illinois]. But, his goal in going to Washington was to go to medical school. He had been accepted at Howard University medical school [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]. And, went there several months before school began to get a job to earn some money to pay his way through medical school. Met my grandmother, and rest as they say, is history. They got married, started to have children, and he never went to medical school. Speaker 1: Very interesting. So, what did he end up doing? Speaker 2: He became a Pullman porter. And, he was, as you know, the railroads were really built in large part by slaves. And, after, after emancipation, people still liked the idea of being waited on and severed by well-spoken and proper colored men. And, so, he became a Pullman porter that--and, his root took him from Washington, D.C. to New York and to Chicago [Illinois]. And, I remember him talking about A. Philip Randolph, and the many interesting and different people he met on the railroad. He loved to tell stories. And, he loved to meet people. And, he loved to listen to people. And, he gathered the stories. And, he loved to share those stories with at least me, and I, and, his other grandchildren and children, which provides the basis for much of my understanding of my family's life and history. But, also the history of Washington, D.C. and, and the country. Speaker 1: He may have known my grandfather, Joseph Hughes, who was a fifty year Pullman porter out of Boston [Massachusetts] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep. Yep. Speaker 1: And, he had a third grade education, according to my mother [Josephine Hughes Hayden], in Petersburg [Virginia]. But, my mother used to say, "But, he was the most intelligent man. He could speak about any topic." He knew what was going on across the country because the listened to-- Speaker 2: Yep, yep. Listened to their passengers, and the people that they took care of and tucked in at night (simultaneous). Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Um-hm. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: That's great. Story_ID: 269427 Speaker 1: Tell me about your [maternal] grandmother [Elise Goodwin (ph.)] and a little bit about her. Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother was born in Washington, D.C. Her mother was a cook, and a--gifted cook and pastry chef. And, she worked as a cook in some of the most prominent homes in Washington, D.C. And, each time that she would get a job, somebody more powerful and richer would hire her away from her previous white employers. And, so, she became very well-known throughout Washington for her ability as a, as a cook and her ability to make cakes and pies. And, one day, a young man who was a capital guard, she met somewhere in Washington, and my great-grandmother and he fell in love. He in fact, was passing. And, he had a very set idea as to who and what kind of woman he wanted. And, my great-grandmother being light skinned as well, but having these talents of being so special in the, in the kitchen. But, also having learned the ways and wherefores, and whereabouts of the people who employed her, made a good catch for him. And, they got married after about a year's courtship; had a son who was named after him, Joseph. His name was Joseph Clore [ph.]. And, for a long time, they lived in Washington and were able to move around, segregated Washington, D.C., at the beginning of the 20th century, going where they wanted, being able to ride in the front of trolley, being able to go to any park, begin able to go in any entrance of any building, until my grandmother was born. And, my grandmother was darker than her older brother. And, within three months of my grandmother's birth, her father, Joseph Clore abandoned the family, and left, and disappeared. He disappeared, as I like to describe it, into the whiteness of America. And, became amongst those hundreds and thousands of black people who passed. Later on she heard that he ended up in Michigan; had another family with a white woman, who never knew that she in fact was married to Negro. So, my grandmother--my great-grandmother was then left to raise her two children; my great uncle whose name was also Joseph and my grandmother. And, when Joseph, my great uncle turned eighteen, he too left, looking for his father. And, he di- he also disappeared into the whiteness of America, leaving my great-grandmother and my, and my grandmother alone, and she went back to working in the kitchens of Washington, D.C., cooking for people and raising this young girl. My grandfather [Richard Goodwin (ph.)] coming to Washington to go to medical school, he needed a place to stay. My great-grandmother was a, as I said, a wonderful cook and made cakes and pies, and people from all over Washington would come to buy her cakes and pies on Sundays. And, she also took in laundry, and she did the collars, as you may know, the collars would come off of shirts because those are the things that got dirty, and she would wash and iron them. And, she also rented rooms, as a lot of people did for this new wave of immigrants coming from the South to Washington, D.C. And, one day, a young man knocked on her door and said, "I need a place to stay. I'm getting ready to start medical school," and she rented him a room. And, the rest as they say, is history. And, here I am. Speaker 1: Good. Story_ID: 269428 Speaker 1: Let's move to your father. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Let's move to your father, and his name was? Speaker 2: Benedict [Edelin]. Speaker 1: And, when was he born and where? Speaker 2: He was born in 1900. And he too was born in Washington, D.C. So, his family, is, is from Charles County, Maryland. The, the Edelins of Charles County, Maryland were tobacco farmers. And, they had tobacco plantations which were worked by slaves. So, his family for generations lived on these tobacco plantations picking tobacco leaves, hanging them in the, in the barns to cure. And, although I never saw it, people told me that if you drive, if you would drive through Charles County, Maryland, there were large barns and then on the side of it would say, "The Edelin Tobacco Plantations." His family after, after emancipation, some stayed on the plantation to work. And, others including my grandfather decided to leave the plantation and come to Washington to seek their fortune. Again, as part of that Great Migration. And, he came to Washington and he became a, he became an ice man. And, he drove a horse-drawn wagon that carried ice and coal around the City of Washington. He worked for somebody. But, while he worked driving the horse-drawn wagon why the--while the big guys with the muscles would take the ice to the houses. He saved his money and he plotted. And, he eventually started his own ice and coal company in Washington, D.C. And, it became the Edelin ice house and coal yard. And, in the early part of the 20th century in Southeast Washington, which was predominantly black, he sold coal and ice to people in that section of Washing- and also, the Northeast Washington. And, he had a very thriving business. But, the coal yard was a place that a lot of people used to hangout. And, my grandfather, and my grandmother [Theresa Edelin (ph.)], his wife, were very observant Catholics. And, they believed that part of what they had to do in observance of their faith, in addition to going to Mass every day, was to share their wealth and their good fortune with other people. And, essentially, accumulated no money or wealth, but gave it away. After my grandmother died, my grandfather continued to support families in Southeast Washington, and never really accumulated a lot of wealth. Although, he made lots of money. It was, it was an interesting experience growing up in Washington, D.C. as a little four or five year old boy and see these huge trucks driving down the street with my last name on them. Edelin moving company, Edelin oil company, Edelin, Edelin coal company, and that was a very interesting experience, but he gave it all away. Speaker 1: Just for the record, his name? Speaker 2: John Anthony Edelin [ph.]. Story_ID: 269429 Speaker 1: And, his [Edelin's grandfather, John Edelin (ph.)] wife's name, your grandmother? Speaker 2: Theresa Edelin [ph.]. They were very devout Catholics. As were the Edelins of Charles County, Maryland, who were the tobacco plantation owners. So, they brought with them their Catholicism from Maryland to Washington [D.C]. And, they had four children. My father was the oldest, Benedict [Edelin]. Named after my grandfather's favorite Saint. His next child was Mary Elizabeth [Edelin], another name of saints. And, then he had two more children; another daughter and then a younger son. And, it was a very interesting family. They were, they were different. They were quiet. They were very devout, except for my father. He became of rebel. My father grew up in Washington and worked in my father's--in my grandfather's coal yard. And, he would have to haul ice and coal. And as, as a result of that, as a young boy, he had, he had built a rather muscular upper body. He had lot of shoulder and arm strength, and had a huge barrel chest. And, he flirted with boxing for a while. And, he became an amateur boxer. His hero was Jack Johnson. And, his hero was Jack Johnson not because, not only because he was such a wonderful boxer. But, because Jack Johnson thumbed his nose at the, at the power structure of America, and defined them. And was so good at what he did, that he decided that he wanted to do, Jack Johnson anything that he could do. And, my father had that kind of sense of rebellion in him too. And, it's one of the reasons why he turned his back on Catholicism, because he could see the segregation and the discrimination in Washington. And, could not understand a religion that would discriminated against God's children. And, turned his back on Catholicism, and all religion for a very long period of time as he pursued his boxing career, until he met my mother [Ruby Goodwin Edelin]. And, decided that he could no longer flirt with this, with this interest of boxing and he had to settle down and get a job; which he did. He took the Civil Service Exam. At the time, the U.S. Government was hiring for the Post Office. He got the highest score in the civil service exam he took that year, and he was hired by the post office, where he stayed for forty years as a mailman. Rose to the level of being supervisor of the official section, the first black person to achieve that in, in the Washington, D.C. post office. Story_ID: 269430 Speaker 1: How do you remember your father [Benedict Edelin] as a person, his personality, what was he like? Speaker 2: Interesting man. He, he saw his role as being the provider. Very traditional role. He worked lots of overtime, which was available to him. He would work on Saturdays and Sundays because he could get time and a half. He would work on holidays so--because he could get double time. And so, we always had wonderful Christmases, but he was never there because he was always working. He was very traditional. It was his job to earn the money. It was his job to give his wife [Ruby Goodwin Edelin] an allowance. It was his job to provide for his family. And, it was her job, my mother's job, to raise the children, to make the clothes, to go to the PTA [parent teacher association] meetings. And, roles were very clearly defined. Story_ID: 269263 Speaker 1: You have such fond memories, [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Kenneth Carlton] Edelin, of your Pullman porter grandfather [Richard Goodwin]-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, the stories that he would tell you. Tell me a little bit more about, about him, because Pullman porters are such an important part of the railroad history and African American labor history. Speaker 2: Well, it's--that's an interesting question. His children and his grandchildren called him father. And, that was father with a capital "F," I'm sure. But, I called him WooWoo. Speaker 1: Well, how would spell that? Speaker 2: W-O-O-W-O-O. And, I called him WooWoo because, I'm told, that every time he would come to see me when I was but an infant and sitting in a highchair perhaps just a bit older, he would come in a make the sound of the train. "Woo Woo," and then, to start to tell me stories about being the Pullman porter on the, on the train. So, when I saw him, I always wanted to hear that sound, "Woo Woo." So, I called him WooWoo. And, he spent hours telling me stories about his adventures on the road and the people he met. And, how it was important to be able to have interactions with people from different backgrounds and being able to talk with them and listen to them. And, that was a very--those were very important times and lessons for me, that I learned from him. Speaker 1: I can see how you carried that on in your, your career as I've watched you. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 269264 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Kenneth Carlton] Edelin, tell me about your siblings. How many siblings you have and their names, and just briefly a little bit about them? Speaker 2: My oldest brother is named Robert Mansfield Edelin. My father [Benedict Edelin] named all of the boys and my mother [Ruby Goodwin Edelin] named her only daughter. And, my father believed that if you gave someone the right name that, that person would live up to that name. So, Robert Mansfield Edelin sounded very important to him and that's the handle he gave his first and oldest son. Bobby as we called him, was a, was an interesting and troubled young man; boy and young man. He was constantly in trouble. He played hooky all the time. I remember him being confined to a reform school when he was about nine or ten because my parents couldn't' do anything with him. Speaker 1: What year was he born? Did you say? Speaker 2: He was born in 1931. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: So, he was, he was a real rebel. But, he was more than a rebel, he was a troublemaker and he liked to fight. And, he played hooky a lot. And, eventually, the enrolled him--he had to go a reform school because he was fighting a lot. And then, they eventually enrolled him into a technical school. It was a school in Washington [D.C.] for colored boys so that they could learn a trade because he just would not go to a regular public school; junior high school, high school. And, even that didn't work out. So, when he turned seventeen, he decided and my father agreed that he ought to go into the [U.S.] Army. And, my father had to sign the papers for him because he was only seventeen. And, he went off to the war, to the Korean War where he became addicted to heroin and spent six years in the Army in various locations. Continuing with the kind of behavior that he had, continuing to be addicted to narcotics. Once he got out of the Army with barely an honorable discharge, he continued that kind of behavior to support his terrible addiction. And, it probably is a source for my interest in substances abuse, especially in pregnant women. Was growing up with an older brother and having spent some time with him when I was older and watching the desperation that he had when he needed to get his fix. There was nothing else that was important to him; not family, not feelings, not anything, there was nothing else that was important to him when he needed to get a fix, then getting that fix. And, he would lie, and steal, and cheat, and fight to get the money that he needed. And, I remember him going into his heroin slump where he used a necktie as a tourniquet, slipped into the bathroom, come out and then stand in the corner and slowly have that slow twisting turn as he then crumbled on the floor into his heroin high, as only heroin addicts can do. He eventually died from the abuse that he put his body through for twenty or thirty years; liver failure, kidney failure. But, seeing him as I became a young adult or an older boy, number one, seeing the torture that he went through and how my family turned against him was probably one of things that kept me from ever experimenting with drugs. But, it also instilled in me an interest in substance abuse and why people start in the first place, and treatment. And, much of my work in my later life as an obstetrician gynecologist was in drug abuse during pregnancy and how we needed to try and treat those women as--so as to be able to improve the outcome of their pregnancies. And, I'm sure it all stems from my big brother, Bobby. Speaker 1: Um-hm. Story_ID: 269265 Speaker 1: And, Milton [Edelin] was you second brother (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Milton was the exact opposite. Milton was quiet and reserved, a wonderful artist. We have several artists in the family, and I think Milton got that artistic gene from them. He used to sketch in pastels and in charcoal scenes from around Washington, D.C. Went to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]. And, I'm sure you've heard about Dunbar High School in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: What year was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in 1923. Speaker 1: Twenty-three [1923], or '30 [1930]--? Speaker 2: I'm sorry, '33 [1933]. Speaker 1: Thirty-three [1933]. Speaker 2: Yeah. And, he was very studious and very smart. And, the questions I remember getting as I went through the public schools of Washington, D.C. many years later was, "Oh, you're Milton's little brother. Are you as smart as he was?" So, I had big shoes to fill in, in terms of schooling. He was a remarkable student; wanted to go to college. He went to Columbia University in New York [New York]; worked through high school to save money to be able to pay his tuition, and worked through college. And, not only did he work through college to pay his own tuition but he also worked through college to help pay my tuition. Very bright; moved, after he graduated from architecture school, became a very successful architect and city planner in San Francisco [California] where he currently lives with his wife and his two grown sons and their families. Story_ID: 269266 Speaker 1: My sister, Norma [Edelin Johnson], was born a year after Milton [Edelin]. And, she was the first girl and their last child. She had curly hair, and her nick name was Shirley Temple because she had those long ringlet curls like Shirley Temple did. And, so, people used to think that she looked like a little Shirley Temple. She was, she was the girl. She was born at home. She was actually born at my grandmother's house with a Christian Science midwife in attendance. My three older sibs [siblings] were all born at home, but Norma was born at my grandmother's home. And, as she was born all of my mother's [Ruby Goodwin Edelin] sisters were there, watching their first granddaughter and niece being born. My great-grandmother, Grannie; my grandmother, Elise [Goodwin (ph.)]; and then all of my mother's sisters. And, after this little girl was born, they each held her, and they each kissed her, and they each whispered something in her ear, I am told. And, it was that special bond amongst the Goodwin women that was passed down to Grannie to Elise to Ruby, my mother, and then to my sister Norma. And, they all have very, very similar characteristics, the women, the Goodwin women, they're very nurturing and they, they are very maternal. Story_ID: 269267 Speaker 1: Let's go to your earliest memories of growing up. How far back do you remember as a child and what, what do you remember as your earliest memories? Speaker 2: My earliest memories are of air raid warnings in Washington, D.C. during World War II [WWII] of searchlights crisscrossing the dark, black, Washington sky; being frighten by that because I was told that I would--they're might be airplanes there that would drop bombs on the city that might kill us. I can distinctly remember being in a stroller, being pushed along the Washington street as my mother [Ruby Goodwin Edelin] pushed us back from a Sunday dinner, rolling us back from a Sunday dinner at my grandmother's [Elise Goodwin (ph.)] house, her mother's house, back to our home, which was mile and a half, two miles away, and it was dark. And, these awful searchlights in the black skies of Washington, D.C. And, the, and the air raid sirens going off and, and putting my head down on the front of the stroller and covering my head with my arms so I couldn't hear it or see it. I also remember when there was V-E Day, Victory in Europe, and V-J Day [Victory over Japan]. And, riding up and down my--the street in front of my house on a little bike with streamers and noise maker celebrating the end of the war. And, the end of those terrible sights of air raid warnings and searchlights in the sky. My father [Benedict Edelin] was an air raid warden. He was the air raid warden for our neighborhood. He was too old and had too many children to go off to fight in the war. But, he wanted to do his part. My family was very patriotic. Three of my mother's brothers went off to fight in World War II; one in the [U.S.] Navy. My uncle Reginald [ph.] was one of the first black ensigns in the U.S. Navy. And, her two younger brothers went into the [U.S.] Army; one served in Europe and the other served in, in the Pacific. So, I remember the end of the war. And, and the war--I remember stepping on tin cans, remember we had to recycle tin cans for--in the war effort. I remember having coupons that we needed to have in order to purchase gas or sugar. And, and everybody got a coupon book and, and it was called a ration book because things were rationed during World War II. I remember going to the same elementary school as did my three older siblings; Lovejoy Elementary School [Lovejoy School, Washington, D.C.], which was block and a half from our home. I remember being taken there by my mother on the first day of school; being frighten about going to kindergarten. So, my memories of Washington in the early years started off being frightening but at, at the end of the war in 1944, 1945, Washington became a wonderful place to be for a little colored boy growing up in Northeast Washington. Speaker 1: Okay-- Story_ID: 269268 Speaker 1: You talked about your neighborhood, your father [Benedict Edelin] was an air warden. Tell me about what street you were on, what number, and a little bit about that street and your neighbors. What do you remember about the community (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. It's--we grew up, I grew up on Maryland Avenue in Northeast Washington [D.C.], Maryland Avenue, 1228 Maryland Avenue, and it was the house--our house was right in the middle of the block. Maryland Avenue is one of those long boulevards that radiated out from the [U.S.] Capitol [Washington, D.C.]. You know, the--Washington, D.C. was laid out by L'Enfant, Pierre L'Enfant. But, he got fired by [President] George Washington. And, so, Benjamin Banneker; a Negro, a black man, a color man, had to finish the job. So, Maryland Avenue was one of those long boulevards that radiated out from the center of the city, out of, out from the Capitol. And, in fact, we could stand in the middle of our street and we could see the Capitol. And, it was a very wide street with a grassy strip that ran down the middle that had some bushes in it. And, it was an interesting block, architecturally it was like somebody had taken a bunch of kids to--blocks from different size boxes and thrown them together. So, at the end, one end going away from the Capitol there were six story apartment buildings and then the end closer to the Capitol, there were single family houses. But, they were joined together. All of the houses were row houses. The houses nearest the Capitol were occupied by white people. There was a block in transition. And, then our house was in the middle of the block and then the end of the block furthest away from the Capitol was there these apartment buildings were. And, where lots of colored people lived. The house at the very end of our block on Maryland Avenue, right at the corner of 13th Street and Maryland Avenue, was a whorehouse. Next to it was a bootlegger's house. Next to it was the numbers runner's house. So, it was an interesting street, block between 12th [Street] and Maryland Avenue, and 13th and Maryland Avenue; went from white to black. It went from very conservative to very radical. And, as I would leave out of the house as a young boy of six or seven, I was always admonished, "Kenneth don't go down to that corner house." And, you know right where I went. I had wonderful friends who lived in the corner house. It was always a sense of mystery and daring at the corner house. There were boys who lived there and who lived a different lifestyle than I had ever seen. And, it was fascinating for this little six or seven year old boy who lived in the middle of the block to see all of this different stuff going on; different smells, different music. I can remember that my friends had a, one of those wind up Victrolas that play music. And, it was, there were cigarettes and other smells and there were empty wine bottles all over the place. And, there were naked people and near naked people walking in and out and going from apartment to apartment. And, I sat there with my friends in wonderment, as to, "What is this?" And, of course, when I got caught going to the corner house, I got the mandatory spanking. But, I kept going back. Story_ID: 269269 Speaker 1: Tell me about your years at Lovejoy Elementary School [Lovejoy School, Washington, D.C.]. What was that experience like? Speaker 2: That was, that was a defining experience for me. And, it was defining for lots of reasons. First of all, Washington, D.C. in the '40s [1940s] and through the early '50s [1950s] was segregated. Everything was segregated. All of the public schools were segregated. There were two, only two or three swimming pools that we could go to during the summer to swim. There were colored theaters. There was the Republic Theatre [Washington, D.C.], and there was the Plymouth Theatre [Washington, D.C.]. And, we couldn't go to white theaters. There was the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], which preceded the Apollo [Theatre, Washington, D.C.] by about ten or fifteen years. Where I remember being taken by my parents [Ruby Goodwin Edelin and Benedict Edelin] to see Louis Armstrong and Stepin Fetchit, and, and all of those folks. But, Lovejoy Elementary School was, was one of the better elementary schools in Washington. All of my teachers were black, or as we said at the time, colored. They had a deep and abiding interest in us. They knew our parents. They expected the best from us. They insisted that we perform at a very high level. And, I remember in second or third grade, the teacher was going around the classroom and asking each student what they wanted to be when they grew up. And, my best friend was sitting next to me who happened to live on my block and he, he said, "I wanna be a truck driver;" smart guy. I remember him very well. Very nice. My very best friend, and very smart. But, he said he wanted to be a truck driver. Well, hell, if he wanted to be a truck driver, I wanted to be one too. So, when she got to me, she said, "Kenneth, what do you wanna be?" And, I said, "I wanna be a truck driver." She said, "What!" And, she stopped and she stood back and she put her hand on her hip, "You wanna be a truck driver? You don't have to go to college to be a truck driver. You need to go to college. You need to be a doctor." And, I said, "Yes, ma'am." You know, I don't know why she jumped on me. I don't know why she insi--she didn't say that Juney [ph.], who was sitting right next to me. But, she said it to me. And, it was something about me or the fact that she knew my parents, or the way I looked, or what she expected of me, that she expected something from me. Speaker 1: What grade was this? Do you remember how far along you were? Speaker 2: Third grade, fourth grade; very young, very young. So, it was a feeling that the teachers really cared about us. They knew our families. They had very high expectations for, at least some of us. And, pushed us to excel and to achieve. Story_ID: 269270 Speaker 1: You then went on to the Browne Junior High School [Washington, D.C.]? Speaker 2: Yep. Yes (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, what grade was that transition? Speaker 2: That was seventh and eighth grade. But, let me go back to Lovejoy [School, Washington, D.C.]-- Speaker 1: Sure-- Speaker 2: Just for a moment-- Speaker 1: Go ahead. Speaker 2: If you don't mind. Speaker 1: Go ahead, no problem. Speaker 2: If you don't mind. I have two other memories of Lovejoy Elementary School. One, and I think this is an experience that a lot of people can share, that something would happened in school during the school year. Sometimes it would be the first part of the school year, it could be the middle or toward the end. And, one of the guys would get mad at me for some reason, and the admonition was, you wait 'til the last day of school. I'm gonna kick your butt. And, the first time it happened, it was third grade, fourth grade. I said, "Nobody can remember this long." And, on the last day of school, I got my butt kicked. The next year it happ- it was a terrible experience. And, I went home and told my parents [Ruby Goodwin Edelin and Benedict Edelin], and they, you know, they say, "Okay. Well, next year, we'll come pick you up." But, that would've been worst, have your parents waiting for you on the last--and, but, sure enough the next year somebody said, "I'm gonna kick your butt on last--you wait 'til the last day of school, I'm gonna kick your butt." So, I left school early. After I got my report card, I ran home. I said, "I can't go through this." So, as I was going into the fifth grade, I said, "I gotta do something about this." I was a little scrawny kid, didn't know how to fight, didn't know how to do any of that stuff. But, I got my older brother Bobby [Robert Edelin] to take me to school on the first day of school as I was going into the fifth grade. And, everybody in our neighborhood knew Bobby. And, everybody in our neighborhood knew that Bobby was tough and Bobby would fight. And, all of a sudden, I became Bobby's little brother. And, nobody ever bothered me again. So, fifth and sixth grade at Lovejoy was great years, in terms of not getting my butt kicked at the end of, of the year. But, sixth grade for me was also a year of great sadness and tragedy because it was the year that my mother got sick. And, I can remember at the end of fifth grade, in the summer between fifth and sixth grade, she having to go to the hospital. And, I didn't understand what that was all about. And, she came home after being in the hospital for a couple of weeks, and she showed me the scar on her chest where they had to remove her breast because she had breast cancer. And, she tried to explain to me what breast cancer was, and I didn't understand at all. I knew was that this--it was this ugly scar on her chest. And, she rapidly went downhill (telephone ringing), and got sicker and sicker. (Telephone ringing) Do we wanna wait? Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, it seems to be done. Speaker 2: And, she got sicker and sicker. And, the radium treatments weren't working, the hormone treatments weren't working. One day I came home and she had her head in my father's lap and she was crying, and he was on the phone. An x-ray showed that the cancer had spread to her spine. My grandfather convinced her to try Christian Science, so she went into a Christian Science nursing home. She was crocheting one day, which she loved to do and her arm broke just as she was crocheting which meant that the cancer was continuing its march through her body, consuming her and her body. And, I was selected to give the graduation speech in sixth grade, as I--as we were about to graduate to go from elementary school to junior high school. And, I wanted her so much to come to my graduation speech, but she was too sick to come. So, I gave the graduation speech in front of all of my family and all of the family of my classmates. And, then I went to the hospital to give the graduation speech again for my mother. And, she died about two weeks later. Speaker 1: You still have that speech? Speaker 2: I can tell you the first words. Speaker 1: To share, a little bit of it. Speaker 2: "Mrs. Outen [ph.], Mr.," whoever the school superintended was, "Thank you for coming today. Today we stand on the precipice of a new beginning." And, then I went on to give my speech about leaving elementary school and going on to junior high school. Story_ID: 269271 Speaker 1: How'd you make out that next year, in grade seventh and eighth, your mother [Ruby Goodwin Edelin] had passed, how did you make out? Speaker 2: It was awful. My grandparents lived near Browne Junior High School [Washington, D.C.] and they insisted, or suggested, but probably insisted that I come live with them. My three older siblings were gone. My brother [Robert Edelin] was in the [Korean] War. My other two siblings [Milton Edelin and Norma Edelin Johnson] were away in college, so it would be just me and my father [Benedict Edelin]. He was not the warm cuddly type. He was the provider. He would go to, he would, he would go to work to earn the money and he did not know how to handle this rebellious, young man entering into adolescence and puberty. So, my grandmother and my grandfather said, "Bennie [ph.], why don't you let Kenny [HistoryMaker Kenneth Carlton Edelin] come live with us?" And, I did. And, I moved in with them, had my own room, and I started Browne Junior High School, seventh grade. It was an awful year. It was an awful year for me as I entered into adolescence and that awful transformation into, into puberty. But, I was angry because my mother had died. I was angry that she had been taken away from me. And, I developed as a result of that, not only anger, but I lost my voice. I lost the ability to speak in public. I couldn't read in school. My tongue would get frozen. I had a terrible stutter. I wouldn't do anything around the house. I wouldn't do the chores that they gave me. I fought with them. I cried. I swore. I never got violent with them but I got pretty angry at them. And, that--toward the end of that seventh grade year they said to my father, "Bennie, we can't handle him. He's gonna have to come back to live with you." So, I went back and, back to Maryland Avenue and lived with my father when I was in eighth grade. And it, and it wasn't any better. He missed his wife, my mother, terribly. I had never seen him show emotion before, but that year that she was dying, he was in the hospital every day. He held her. He rubbed her head. He stroked her. He held her hand. Because he knew that his Ruby was dying. And, after she died, he became a different person. He was lonely. He was sad. And, he didn't know what to do with this rebellious, now thirteen year old. So, it was a very, very, very difficult year for us. And, I continued to rebel. I continued to lash out. I was still angry. I was angry at the world. I was angry at the doctors. I was angry at God for taking my mother. It was so unfair. And, my brother and sister who were away at college would come home and they would see. And, they could see that I was sinking pretty rapidly. And, of course, everybody's fear that I was gonna take the road that Bobby took. That I was gonna end up in the street. I was gonna become a criminal. I was gonna become a fighter. I might even enter the drug world. And that's what they were afraid of. And my brother and my sister said, "We've gotta get Kenneth out of there." Story_ID: 269431 Speaker 1: So, at grade eight, [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Kenneth Carlton] Edelin, you were back with your father [Benedict Edelin]-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: On Maryland Avenue, and-- Speaker 2: Things were not getting better. He lo--he delved into bridge. He became an avid bridge player and I'm sure in part it was to lose the sorrow that he had. And, he had such a huge void in his life with his wife's [Ruby Goodwin Edelin] death, my mother's death. So, he became an average br- avid bridge player and would leave me at home alone. And, I was petrified. I was petrified that a ghost would come or my mother would appear. She had after all, in those days been laid out in our living room. That's where the funeral was. That's where people came to pay their respects. And, it was in that same living room watching a little black and white TV where the casket had been, that I would sit motionless and paralyzed in the evening when he went out to play bridge. And, would not move until he came home. Stayed there through the playing of the National Anthem ['The Star Spangled Banner'] which was the last thing that they would show on TV and then the static. And, I wouldn't move. I still had lost my voice. I had a terrible stutter. I couldn't read in class. I couldn't speak in public. My tongue would freeze at the back of my throat. I couldn't get words out. I was biting my nails down to the quick. And, my brother [Milton Edelin] and sister [Norma Edelin Johnson] recognized that I was rapidly sinking in this whirlpool of downward spiral. They said, "We've gotta get Kenneth out of Washington [D.C.]." And, they did. My brother was at Columbia [University] in New York [New York] and one of the guys' who lived on his floor in the dormitories father had a--ran a private school in the Berkshire Mountains, Stockbridge School [Stockbridge, Massachusetts]. And, he told his friend about me, and his friend said, "I think my father would probably like to meet your little brother." You know, and one rainy, spring evening, he came to Washington, Hans Maeder, to interview me. And, I got dressed up and put a bow tie and had on knickers and he spent a couple of hours talking to me and my father, and said at the end of that interview, "We'd like Kenneth to come to our school. We would like him to come so much that we will give him a full scholarship." So, I got a full scholarship to leave Washington and to go to the western part of Massachusetts to the Stockbridge School where I spent my four high school years, from ninth through the twelfth grade, in the Berkshire Mountains. It clearly was an experience and an opportunity that saved my life. There is no questions that it saved my life. He got me out of the streets of Washington. Hans Maeder was an interesting, interesting, man. He was German. Had to flee Nazi Germany because he spoke out against the treatment of Jews by the Nazis; the way they were persecuting and carting off Jews. And, he himself was not Jewish. But, he knew that there were something wrong. And, the Gestapo chased him all over Europe and he finally made his way to Northern Africa. And, finally, from Northern Africa to the Pacific to Hawaii and then he finally made it to this country where he ended up in New York, and he taught and he ran a couple of youth centers. And, he taught at some private schools in New York City and decided that he wanted to start his own school. He became a part of the liberal New York movement of left leaning socialist kind of one world (background noise) and the people he, he became friends with were, were--this was in the '40s [1940s], late '40s [1940s], socialist and believed in one world. And, believed in the United Nations [UN] and believe that if we could get people to come together and to live together, we would have a better world. And, so, and many of them were very wealthy. And, many of them were Jewish, and he married a Jewish woman. And, it was her son who was at Columbia, who knew my brother and suggested that I--that Stockbridge School would be a good place for me. Story_ID: 269432 Speaker 1: So, in the middle of the campus [of Stockbridge School, Stockbridge, Massachusetts], I went there as a scrawny little ninth grader, scared out of my mind; had never been around white people before, grew up in segregated Washington [D.C]. Here I was being taken out of the streets of Washington, D.C. and to the Berkshire Mountains, and white people. I had never been around, you know, were they gonna call me names? How were they gonna treat me? I was frightened. And, my aunt and uncle, my mother's [Ruby Goodwin Edelin] sister and her husband drove me up from New York City [New York, New York] to the Berkshires. And, I sat in the back of their 1952 Hudson, scared out of my mind. And, they took me to the main house and they dropped me off, and there I was. I got to meet people from all over the world. In the middle of the campus, not only flew the American flag, but flew the flag of the United Nations [UN]. The school had very close ties to the United Nations, and there were students there, although it was a very small school. There were only twenty-five students in my class. The students were from all over the world. There were--one of my best friends who started there in tenth grade, a year after I got there, was from Ghana. They were students there from China. There were students there from Venezuela and other countries in South America. There were a lot of very wealthy students there from New York City, too. But, I didn't know what the stock exchange was. But, there was a student there whose father had a seat on the stock exchange. What is that? Another student there was--father owned a 21 Club [New York, New York] in New York; a very famous restaurant. So, there was an interesting group of wealthy students that I was exposed to. The strength of Stockbridge School was not only its international student body, which Hans [Maeder] really believed in. That if we could get people to come together, to live together, and try and solve problems together that they would, that we could really make a better world. The other strength of the school was in English and the dramatic arts. It was not very strong in math and science, but it really was very strong in theater, and English, and creativity. And, they kept trying to get me to get involved in drama. But, I could not stand it, in front of a group of people and talk, my tongue wouldn't let me do it. But, my first roommate at Stockbridge School was a tough kid from New Jersey, an Italian kid; this long hair that was combed in a back in something called a ducktail. What, what is a ducktail? It looks like a ducks ass to me quite frankly. But, he did not like the idea of living with a Negro. And, on my second day there, he and I were in the bathroom down the hall, there was one bathroom. He and I were in the bathroom down the hall and we were getting cleaned up for the day and he said something about mother something or other. And, all I heard was mother, and then the other word. And, my--I was still suffering from the pain of my mother's death, and I just flew in the air and grabbed him and tried to wrestle him to the ground. Well, he began, he flipped me over and the pinned me down with his knees on my arms and begin to pound me in the face and beating me up pretty badly. And, a kid who were also in my class from Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York, New York] in New York came in. The other colored boy in my class; pulled him off of me, wrestled him to the ground, so I could get up. And, then they moved me to another room after that. That student was eventually kicked out. The student who rescued me, Dick Nurse [ph.] and I are still friends today; fifty years later. Story_ID: 269433 Speaker 1: But, the school's [Stockbridge School, Stockbridge, Massachusetts] strength really was in the creative arts and they tried for years to get me to become a part of the theater group and drama and I couldn't do it. I just couldn't talk. And, one day the English teacher said, "You know, we really want you to try." I said, "I'll work behind the scenes and I'll do sets, and I'll do stuff." She said, "I want you to meet somebody." And, she sent me down the road near Tanglewood [Music Center, Lenox, Massachusetts]. There was a women who lived there who was a drama coach from New York [New York]. She said, "I want you to work with her." And, she taught me how to breathe and how to talk. And, after a series of weekly meetings with her, she deconditioned me essentially from the stutter which I had. And, talk me how to talk again in a new way. Taught me how to breathe again in a new way. So, that after three years of not being able to talk, with a terrible, terrible stutter, I began to be able to speak. And, I took part in the school play, and it was Greek play ['Electra,' Euripides], and the words were, "Stay tis a new thing. We have still a word to speak." And, I was able to say those words on a stage in front of an audience full of people without a stutter, without any hesitation. So, I regained my voice, and I regained my life. I became an athlete. I became a scholar. I eventually, as time went on, became a leader in the school. By the time I was in the twelfth grade, I was one of the student leaders of the school. The other student leader was Dick Nurse [ph.], the person who had saved me from being beat up, worse than I had already been beaten. And, he and I became friends, we were roommates. We became friends and we have remained friends ever since. He was captain of the basketball team, and I was captain of the soccer team, and both he and I did dramatics. And, he was musician and be played guitar and piano. And, but, he was from the streets of Brooklyn [New York, New York], from Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant]. And, we used to go see his cousins perform; Hines, Hines and Dad, at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York]. And, I got to know Gregory [Hines] and [HistoryMaker] Maurice [Hines, Jr.] well and it began a wonderful relationship. But, going to Stockbridge School; there is no question it saved my life. It got me out of the streets of Washington, D.C., and it gave me back my voice. Story_ID: 269434 Speaker 1: At that point in high school, twelfth grade, did you have any clues or notions about what you wanted to be professionally, what you wanted to do as an adult? Had you made any decisions or? Speaker 2: Well, I have alwaysed--always liked science. I was always fascinated by how things worked. How living things worked. And, as a youngster in Washington, D.C., I would dig around in our backyard. And, I'd find earthworms and beetles and bugs and dissect them to try and figure out how they worked and what makes living organisms live the way they are. I remember spending a week on a farm in Virginia once and tadpoles and frogs fascinated me. So, I had always had an interest in science, and especially in the live sciences and how things lived and worked. I think that coupled with my mother's [Ruby Goodwin Edelin] slow, and torturous death propelled me into medicine; wanting to see if I could prevent that from happening to somebody else. And, so, always in the back of my mind there was medicine. And, but, when I graduated from Stockbridge [School, Stockbridge, Massachusetts] and went on to college, I looked at some other things. I had thought about engineering. It was the beginning of the space age and maybe an aeronautical engineer would be something which would be fascinating, and rockets and going into space, and all of those kinds of things. And, Sputnik and all the rest. But, still with me was this notion that perhaps I could help people in the way that my mother had not been helped. So, there was always this calling to medicine. And, that calling was as I, as I got to college, that college was reinforced by friends who I had known from Stockbridge who kept encouraging me to pursue this, that this, that this really would be my life's work. Rather than, cold engineering in working with living organisms and human beings and trying to get them better. That medicine really is, where they saw, and where I think I always knew I would end up. Speaker 1: Did that third grade teacher [at Lovejoy School, Washington, D.C.], who said, "You should be a doctor," did that come back into play at all? Speaker 2: Probably on some level it did. She certainly insisted that I be something other than a truck driver. I think that story is probably more emblematic of the way they pushed us, the way the encouraged us. The way they wanted us to reach beyond ourselves, beyond our own dreams for ourselves, to achieve something better and higher. Speaker 1: When you finished medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and, or a resident, young doctor, was she by chance still around and did she know what had happened to you? Do you know? Speaker 2: I don't know. The--I, I don't know that. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I don't know that. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: I don't know that. There were lots of people from Washington who were. Who were around and who had been important in my life. But, I don't know whether she was or not (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 269435 Speaker 1: At Columbia University [New York, New York] you majored in? Speaker 2: I was pre-med, but I was a psychology major. And, that too is an interesting story, because Stockbridge School [Stockbridge, Massachusetts] was very, very good in the creative arts and drama and English. It was not very strong in the sciences and math. So, I went to Columbia, with a very strong English background and humanities background but not a very strong science and math background. I mean, I liked it and did well in chemistry and those kinds of things. But, college was a struggle for me. But, it was also a struggle because here I've been in this cocoon in the Berkshire Mountains of, of liberalism, of one-worldism, of, of, of creativism, and then I went to Columbia which is very traditional, a very traditional Ivy League school. You know, where you had to fit into this mold and they had this philosophy of the development of the whole man. That's what their curriculum as built around. To make Columbia men, whole men. The problem was that Columbia was right in the middle of New York City [New York, New York]. And, here I was an eighteen year old young man plopped down into the middle of New York City in the era of bitten--beatniks, and free love, and Greenwich Village [New York, New York], and drinking at age eighteen and, and coffee houses and poetry, and guitar strumming, and that's what I knew from Stockbridge. It was the folk singers. It was the Woody Guthrie's, and it was the free love. And, so, I spent most of the first part of my first year at Columbia in Greenwich Village, sitting in Washington Square in the fountain there; going to coffee houses, listening to people recite poetry, and [Allen] Ginsberg, and [Jack] Kerouac, and, and, and reading James Baldwin, and, and women; oh my goodness. Women, not little girls, women. And, so, I got kind of distracted from my academics. And, the first semester of my first year there at mid-term, I did so badly, 'cause I was hanging out at the White Horse Cafe [sic. White Horse Tavern, New York, New York] and all of these coffee houses down in Greenwich Village, I got a letter from the dean. It said, "Young man, you are not doing well enough to stay here. And, if you don't do better, we're gonna have to put you on probation. And, we--if you don't do any better than that, you might not be able to stay at Columbia." Well, I got my act together. I was able to--I was, I was smart enough to know that I had to get off of the streets and get back into the classroom and hit the books. And, that began to help me turn my life back more to the academics. I still was very active on, on campus. I got out of the Village, however, but took out some of my activism on campus. Met people that I had never, met people from a certain strata of society which I had never met before. There were some, "Negro girls" who went to Barnard [College, New York, New York] who were from very wealthy families in and around New York, and Chicago [Illinois], and Washington [D.C.]. Which growing up in Washington, D.C. I had no idea that such things as Jack and Jill [of America] ever exis- I didn't know what a, what Jack and Jill--I didn't know what a cotillion was. What is a cotillion? There was these, these beautiful girls who ca- whose fathers were physicians and lawyers. And, there all kinds of wonderful things that came from such a strata of society that I had never seen before, experienced before, either at Stockbridge or from the streets of Washington, D.C., that it again, opened up a new world for me. People that I still know today who are wonderful people. Who've accomplished a great deal in their lives. Story_ID: 269436 Speaker 1: So, you graduated from Columbia U [Columbia University, New York, New York] in what year? Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961]. Speaker 1: And, your degree was in? Speaker 2: I had a Bachelor of Arts degree with a psychology major, and completed all of my pre-med requirements. I decided to be--still with the idea that I was gonna go to medical school, felt like I needed a break. And, again, that was a very smart decision on my part. So, I decided to teach for a couple of years. So, I went back to Stockbridge [School, Stockbridge, Massachusetts] as a teacher. So I-- Speaker 1: And, you taught, what you teacher? Speaker 2: I taught science and math. I mean after all, I had taken all of these biology and other science courses in college. I, I went back for a reunion, and Hans Maeder was still the headmaster, said, "Why don't you come and teach for a couple years?" Speaker 1: By the way, (unclear) would you spell his name for us for the record? Speaker 2: M-A-E-D-E-R. Speaker 1: Okay. Hans. Speaker 2: Hans, H-A-N-S. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: Hans Maeder. And, he said, "Why don't you come back and teach?" So, I went back a taught for two years. The bonus in my first year, was that I accompanied a group of students that had a, an international, they had expanded upon the international as- aspect of their education. So, that juniors, eleventh graders at Stockbridge spend a semester living in France. And, they needed a chaperone to go with them. So, there were three of us. It was an older man, a British gentlemen who was a teacher, history teacher at Stockbridge, who had been a, an espionage agent in the British Army during World War II [WWII]; spoke four different languages. It was an older woman who went as kind of the house mother for the girls, and, and me, who was more, who was closer to their age and could keep up with them. And, I also had some teaching responsibilities to teach them math and science. So, we, so we taught them, but the purpose of the trip was to take these eleventh graders to a new culture. So, we lived outside of Paris [France] in a small town called Sevres [France] which is at the end of the Metro lines just outside of Paris. And, so, I spent six months there; learned to speak French, learned to drink French wine. And, then came back to Stockbridge, taught summer school and then during my second year at Stockbridge said, "Okay, now it's time to apply to medical school." Story_ID: 269437 Speaker 1: Knew some people who had gone to Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], who I admired greatly; two in particular. Speaker 2: Who were they? Speaker 1: Maurice Clifford. Maurice Clifford was a wonderful man who early on became my mentor. He was an obstetrician gynecologist from a rather prominent family in Washington, D.C. And, had married Patricia Johnson who was the daughter of Charles S. Johnson. My sister [Norma Edelin Johnson] is married to Charles S. Johnson's youngest son [J. Johnson]. So, there was a familial connection there. And he, he, Maurice, knew that I had an interest in medicine and kind of took me under his wing. Maurice became, in addition to being an obstetrician gynecologist in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and a very successful one at that, became the president of the medical college, Women's Medical College [of Pennsylvania; Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in Philadelphia. The first black person to become the president of a white medical school. And, he did that for about ten years and then retired from that and then became the commissioner of health for the City of Philadelphia. So, Maurice and--loved art, loved music, he was a Phi Beta Kappa graduate from Hamilton College in [Clinton] New York. A very bright person and had gone to Meharry to get his M.D. degree, and was on the board of trustees there. And, he said, "[HistoryMaker] Kenneth [Carlton Edelin], if you still wanna go to medical school, I will help you." And, I would spend hours with him, talking about medicine and obstetrics and gynecology. The other person, was also a part of the Johnson family. And, it was Charles S. Johnson, Jr. who was also a Meharry graduate, who was a general practitioner in Dayton, Ohio; was a Tuskegee Airman; lived and flew on the edge all the time; very smart, like his father, very smart. But, as a Tuskegee Airman would buzz houses and fly upside down and did all of those kinds of things that some of the Tuskegee Airmen did. But, he too was a mentor for me, and steered me in the direction of, of Meharry. So, after teaching for a year and going into my second year of teaching [at Stockbridge School, Stockbridge, Massachusetts], I said, "Okay, now it's time for me to pursue my dream of going to medical school." Talked to both of them, spent time with them, applied to Meharry. They helped me. There's no question that they helped me get in. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And, I got in. Story_ID: 269438 Speaker 1: Tell me about--was it a three years, four years at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], how-- Speaker 2: Four years. Speaker 1: Tell about, briefly about those four years and how you remember them. Speaker 2: Well, Meharry Medical College is, at the time, was one of two black medical schools in the country, and it was the only private black medical school in the country. It had been started as many HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] by wealthy white people giving money to start educational institutions. And, the educational institutions were usually administered and run by religious institutions. And, it was the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Church which ran, which helped to start Meharry. It was, or is, located in the poorest section of Nashville, Tennessee. The neighborhood around the hospital and medical school, there was no indoor plumbing; people lived in poverty. I saw for example, a one year old baby die of lead poisoning there, came into the hospital losing neurological function. I saw then, twenty-four hours later his twin brother come in and also die of lead poisoning. It became very clear in one of the things that we learned at Meharry from day one is the impact of poverty and people's living conditions on their health. I saw a young woman when I was a third year medical student die from an illegal abortion. I saw one of my professors desperately try to save her life, by operating on her. And, as he opened her abdomen, there was the perforated uterus and a red rubber catheter floating around in her abdomen. Seventeen year old girl, whose only problem was that she was pregnant and didn't wanna be pregnant. And, in 1966 found an illegal abortionist to abort her, or tried it herself. And, she died. And, I remember the, the, the vision that is burned into my memory is of my professor desperately operating on her, trying to save her life, did everything he could. And, in the recovery room sitting beside her bed having done everything that he could do, and she never waking up and dying with him holding her hand. As soon as he saw her in the emergency room, he knew what the problem was. He had seen so many. It was such a common problem, such a prevalent problem of young women, especially poor young women, especially black young women finding themselves pregnant and not wanting to be. And, being so desperate that they would do anything to terminate the pregnancy, even putting their lives and their health on the line. Story_ID: 268825 Speaker 1: So, you graduated from Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee] in 1967? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And, what was next? What came next? Speaker 2: Well, then I did my internship in Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio. I was in the [U.S.] Air Force because the Air Force had paid part of my medical education. I didn't have any money. And, during that time, during the Vietnam War, every physician, every man who was a doctor, had a two year obligation to serve in one of the branches of the armed services. And, because they had paid a year of my medical school education, I had an additional year that I had to pay them back. So, I did my internship and then spent three years on the active duty during both as a general practitioner in England; I got assigned to England, and as an obstetrician gynecologist. The base hospital I was assigned to in England was short OB-GYNs [obstetrician gynecologist]. And, so they asked me if I'd like to spend part of my time doing that. And, since I had intended to go into obstetrics, it was a great opportunity for me to spend some time before my specialty training doing what I love; delivering babies, taking care of women, as well as being a general practitioner. So, I did that for three years in England courtesy of the United States Air Force. And, rose to the rank of captain, spent a month in Amman, Jordan, as part of an emergency medical team when they tried to assassinate King Hussein [bin Talal] of Amman, set up a hospital in a tent in the desert in Amman, Jordan to take care of the casualties as a result of the insurrection. And, after that, set up a clinic in Amman, Jordan to take care of the Bedouin with the--who are the nomads, and travel throughout the desert, and had a little goatee and long sideburns and every thought I was the Arabic doctor. So, I had people coming from all over the surrounding area of Amman, the Bedouins, coming to see that Arabic doctor. And, set up a little clinic and took care of all kinds of problems from shrapnel wounds to broken bones to all kinds of things. And, the line formed around the hospital because everybody wanted to come see the Arabic doctor who was there from America. But, from--after I got discharged from the Air Force, I came to do my residency in obstetrics and gynecology at Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 268826 Speaker 1: How did it happened to be Boston, Boston City [Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, Boston [Massachusetts] is the medical capital of the world. Speaker 1: Was it your choice? Or, did you win a lottery? Or, how did you--? Speaker 2: Well, no, it was--Boston was a favorite place to train in medicine. Boston is the medical capital of the world. It was a place that had the best teaching hospitals. And, at the time, my wife at the time, also wanted to get her advanced degree. She started the Afro American Institute [sic. African-American Institute; John D. O'Bryant African-American Institute] at Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: When did you get married to--? Speaker 2: I got, I got married to my first wife when I--at the end of my third year in medical school. So, in 1966. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We had two children. Speaker 1: And, your children's name? Speaker 2: Kenny [Kenneth Edelin, Jr.] is my oldest son. He is now an attorney in Washington, D.C. And, he was born in Dayton, Ohio. And, my daughter, Kimberley [Edelin Freeman], who just had a baby yesterday, was born in England while we were stationed in, in Great Britain. So, until she was eighteen, she had dual citizenship. She was both a Brit and an American. And, she's gone on to get her Ph.D. in education and psychology. Speaker 1: Okay. Kenneth, Jr. was born what year? Speaker 2: He was born in 1967. Speaker 1: And, Kimberley? Speaker 2: Kimberley was born in 1970. Speaker 1: Okay. Thanks. Story_ID: 268827 Speaker 1: So, you come to Boston [Massachusetts], you have a family. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: And, you come in as a resident at Boston City [Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Tell us about those years as a resident. Speaker 2: Where do I begin? Boston City Hospital was like many municipal hospitals in, in the country. It was a huge edifice of disjointed care. The buildings were not only disjointed but the care delivered to the patients was disjointed. Don't forget that I had come from a place where I had seen medicine practiced in poor areas of Nashville [Tennessee]. But, then I had gone to the [U.S.] Air Force where I saw a different kind of medicine practiced. So, I got to Boston. All of the patients, or almost all of the patients were black and lived in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] of the South End, or Mattapan [Boston, Massachusetts], or Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts]. And, I came there to do my specialty training and obstetrics and gynecology. I saw women with four and five babies who were in their thirties and forties and people calling them by their first name, or calling them girl. I saw women who would come in and their significate others, the husbands, the fathers of their babies were not allowed to be with them while they were in labor. Because the nurses were afraid that they would be attacked by these men who would see their wives or the mother of their child in pain and go crazy. I saw women having their post-partum care with antiseptic solutions being poured on their genitalia and the episiotomy for antiseptics and cleanliness. I saw women at Boston City Hospital being taken into something that was called the tub room where they had to be disinfected before they were allowed back to the labor room to be with other patients. Because obviously these poor and black woman were dirty and had disease. And, they would be hosed down on these marble slabs which were called tubs. They were literally hosed down before they were allowed to be taken back to the labor room. It was inhumane. I saw research carried out and women who didn't know that they were being part of a research project. I saw things happened that shocked me. I saw women lose their dignity. They examining rooms in the GYN clinic [gynecological clinic] were little, tiny closet size rooms where there was no privacy. And, then after the patient was examined, she was invited out to this large common area where the resident doctor who was taking care of her would sit down next to her, at a large table where there might be four or five other women. And, four or five other doctors talking, where the patient would be told about the venereal disease that she had, or the cause of the vaginal discharge that she had might be a sexually transmitted disease. Or, that she was pregnant and didn't wanna be, or that the baby she was carrying had some severe malformation. There was a loss of privacy. There was a loss of dignity. And, women were treated in what I felt to be inhumane in ways that were wrong. There was no continuity of care. There was very little supervision of the resident staff by fully-trained attending staff. We had some terrible, terrible incidents. That end, ended up, that you may or may not recall on the front page of the Boston Globe where a group of medical students charged that there was excessive surgery at Boston City Hospital in the OB-GYN [obstetrics gynecology] department. That women who wanted to be sterilized, if they were black had hysterectomy, but if they were white had their tubes tied. Because it's more of a teaching opportunity to have a hysterectomy. And, those were some terrible, terrible times. And, while they tried to explain it away, being on the inside and seeing some of the things that were going on, there was a fair amount of truth to what the allegations were. But, the student were complaining not only about excessive surgery. The students complained and documented the inhumane way that poor women, and in particular black women, and Hispanic women were treated when they came to the OB-GYN service at Boston City Hospital. And, they were right. Speaker 1: Now, was Boston City affiliated with BU [Boston University] Medical [Center Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] at that point, or not? Speaker 2: Boston City was affiliated with all three medical schools; Tufts [University School of Medicine, Medford, Massachusetts], Harvard [Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], and Boston University [School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts]. The all three medical schools were there and that was part of the problem. It was, it was triplication of services. Except for the OB-GYN department, OB-GYN department had been unified, long before I got there. And, so, the chief was a BU doctor, but there were two associate chiefs, one from Harvard, one from Tufts. But, there were three medical schools, and they all competed. And, there were--so there were three x-ray services, three lab services, three wards. So, it was this competition within the hospital for patients, and for training. And, it was the place to be. To be on the Harvard service as a resident or as a fellow, or as an intern, at Boston City Hospital, I mean, there was nothing better than that in the country. It was the best training place in the world. Story_ID: 268828 Speaker 1: What was the next move for your once you finished your specialty training as a resident? What happened next? Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: In your career? Speaker 2: What happened next, was prior to my finishing my training. When I was--during my last year of training, I was selected to be the chief resident. That was the first time that an African American has been chief resident at Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts]. And, that gave me the opportunity to put some things into place I thought would make the care better for women. I tried to have continuity clinics so that the same doctor who saw patients in the outpatient department would take care of them when they came into the inpatient. I made sure that we had more attending coverage. So, there wasn't just residents teaching residents; inexperienced people teaching other inexperienced people. But, we had more experienced doctors supervising the care. And, that was one of the things as chief resident I could do. But, early on in my chief residency years, a young seventeen year old girl came into the hospital, came into the clinic, she was pregnant; didn't wanna be pregnant, came with her mother, was seen by one of the attending physicians, one of the senior staff physicians. And, he agreed that she could have the pregnancy termination, which is what they were requesting. She was requesting an abortion. This was after Roe v. Wade was, was determined in January of 1973. This was in October of 1973, so nine months later. So, she was ad--she was admitted to our second trimester abortion unit. And, I took care of her; provided the abortion. And, six months later I was indicted for manslaughter in the death of a fetus as a result of that abortion, while I was still in my residency. It was April of 1974. I had two months to go in my training. Not only was I indicted for manslaughter, I was suspended from my residency training. And, my career was over, essentially. And, went to trial about a year later, in January of 1975, we started a trial. Story_ID: 268829 Speaker 1: How did you handle that year before you went to trial? You--your residency [at Boston City Hospital; Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] was suspended. How did you handle that Elin--[HistoryMaker] Dr. [Kenneth Carlton] Edelin? Speaker 2: It was, it was an awful time. I mean, you know, everything I had worked for all of my life was gone. Not only was I suspended from my training, I had two months before I was gonna be a specialist in obstetrics and gynecology. I had my boards to study for. And, the Board of Registration in Medicine was threatening to take my license. It became very clear early on that this was a group of people in the district attorney's office, the assistant district attorney, who had an agenda. And, they were outraged as--at the [U.S.] Supreme Court ruling in Roe v. Wade [1973]. And, this was the first attack on a woman's right to legally chose abortion after Roe v. Wade in January of 1973. This was the first attack. They had tried to indict other doctors in other cities. It didn't work. They had had coroner's inquest for other doctors in other abortion cases; never stuck. In Boston [Massachusetts], it stuck. And, it stuck because there were lots of strong feelings by the people who were in power; the Irish, Newman [A.] Flanagan, Joe Mulligan [Joseph I. Mulligan, Jr.], the other assistant district attorney, Charles Brennan [sic. Charles Dunn and Donald Brennan], that they were gonna do something about Roe v. Wade, and they were gonna use this case to make a point. And, they pursued it, and they were successful. I was reinstated. I was allowed to finish my training program. I was only suspended for a week. There was such a public outcry amongst the interns and residents and the citizens of Boston about what they were doing to me, that the board of trustees had to reverse the decision of the hospital administrator to suspend me. Said, "No. You will reinstate this man. He will be allowed to finish his training." The Board of Registration in Medicine said, "We are not gonna take away his license." I was able to finish my training, and under indictment took my specialty boards and passed them. Students say to me all the time, they have stress in their lives and they can't study for the boards. I tell 'em, I said, "You don't know about stress, and studying. I can tell you about stress and studying." I was hired by Boston City Hospital to be director of the ambulatory care unit of, of the outpatient department, after I finish my training. So, in July, sorry, in July of 1974, I became director of ambulatory services. And, my goal was, to again, to improve the care of women who came to Boston City Hospital. So, I worked in every neighborhood health center in the City of Boston. And, hired doctors, obstetrician gynecologist to work in neighborhood health centers in the City of Boston. And, developed a neighborhood health center base practice. So, that the doctors who saw their patients in the health centers could come into the hospital to take care of them once they were hospitalized, to delivery their babies, or to perform their surgery; something which had never been done before. All the while, trying to prepare for a trial. Having to pick a lawyer, having to get expert witnesses, try to raise money to pay for my legal expenses. And, from July through December of '74 [1974], I did my job, and prepared for my trial, picked my attorney, Bill Homans [William P. Homans, Jr.] who was known around Boston as a great civil libertarian lawyer, he was the Bill counselor of, William counselor of-- Speaker 1: I remember him well. Speaker 2: --Boston. A very, very prominent Brahmin family, a great civil, civil libertarian. And, he became my attorney, and we went to trial in January of 1975. Newman Flanagan, and Joe Mulligan, and the other two guys who were at the district attorney's desk prosecuted me and carried on trial in front of James [P.] McGuire, who was the, the presiding judge. And after a six week trial, the jury of nine men, and three women, ten of whom were Roman Catholic found me guilty of manslaughter in the death of a fetus, as a result of a legal abortion. Speaker 1: That was 1975? Speaker 2: Yes, sir. February 15th, 1975. Story_ID: 268830 Speaker 1: The verdict went against the weight of the evidence. Nobody, but nobody after hearing the evidence presented at trial and our arguments against [Newman A.] Flanagan's theory of the case, which changed in the middle of the case by the way, nobody, but nobody thought that I would be found guilty. But, that jury, in this city, with that district attorney, was like the perfect storm. It all came together, at the right place, and at the right time. And, it had a chilling effect on women's healthcare. Hospitals around town stopped doing abortions. Hospitals around town stopped letting residents do pregnancy terminations all up and down the East Coast. Hospitals changed the rules and regulations as to who was eligible for pregnancy terminations and who could do them. It had a chilling effect, which is what they wanted. They wanted to attack a woman's right to choose. They wanted to attack the [U.S.] Supreme Court's ruling in Roe v. Wade [1973]. And, they did. And, they were successful. We, of course, appealed the case. I had to go out on the speaking circuit to raise money to pay for the enormous legal bills which a trial of this nature mounted, and engendered, and caused. And, and at the end of every speech whether it was here in Boston [Massachusetts], or whether it was in Chicago [Illinois], or Los Angeles [California], we passed the hat. We'd pass a bucket. And, ask people to contribute to the Kenneth Edelin Defense Fund. And, we raised enough money to pay for not only the cost of the trial but also the cost of the appeal. And, in December of 1976, after we argued before the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts [SJC], the verdict was overturned. And, not only did the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts overturn the verdict, they entered a new verdict of not guilty, which precluded, prevented, stopped, Newman Flanagan from coming after me again. If they had just thrown out the verdict, he could've come back at me. But, they now-- Speaker 2: How'd you feel? Speaker 1: Not only did they throw out the verdict, they entered the verdict of not guilty, which was vindication but the scar remains. Speaker 2: How'd you feel that day? Speaker 1: That's an interesting question. It's similar to the question how I felt, if you don't mind my say so, when people ask me how I felt when I was sentenced. After I was convicted, I had to be sentenced. And, they judge sentenced me to a year's probation. Well, they say, "Well, you should feel good about having a year's probation." I said, "I shouldn't've been convicted at all. I shouldn't've been indicted at all." So, yeah, I'm happy I'm not going to jail, 'cause I heard all kinds of stories about who was waiting for me at Norfolk County Prison [Norfolk County Correctional Center, Dedham, Massachusetts]. But, I shouldn't've been indicted or convicted in the first place. And, so when the verdict was overturned, I was, I was, it was like huge weight had been lifted off of my shoulders. I was, I was free. I was free. And, that was in December of 1976. And, the SJC said in the final paragraph of their decision, "In the calm of appellate review, it is clear that there was no malice of thought and no criminal intent in providing the care to his patient that the defended provided. And, prosecutors cannot judge what a physician does because prosecutors are not there when decisions are made under the circumstances which they are made." So, that was 1976. Four years later I was chairman of the department of obstetrics and gynecology at Boston University [School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts] in Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts]. And, that was the real vindication, if you will. Story_ID: 268831 Speaker 1: But I was able to, in a very short period of time, from being an indicted and convicted felon to becoming chairman of the department where I spent the next eleven years as chief of obstetrics and gynecology at Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: And, that was four years later, you got that, right? Speaker 1: Yes. Trying to improve the healthcare of women, especially poor women and black women. And, improve the outcome of pregnancies for poor and black women. And, we continued our efforts to provide continuity of care. We strengthened the neighborhood health centers and our relationships with them. And, I recruited fully training obstetrician gynecologist to work there. We developed a group practice, so that people could work in the neighborhood and also work at City Hospital and come to bring their patients there. And, it was a new day, and I did that for eleven years, and we had an impact on the health of women in the City of Boston [Massachusetts], especially poor women and black women. We reduced the infant mortality rate. We improved continuity of care. We improved the quality of care. We did research. We, we established clinics for women who were substance abusers who were pregnant. We tried to get them off of their drug of choice and to treatment. And, sometimes that treatment was--we were required to admit them to the hospital. We, we took care of women who had no place to live, who are homeless, and sometimes we would admit them to the hospital just to give them shelter. We worked with the Boston Housing Authority [BHA], and Doris Bunte to try to develop emergency shelters for pregnant women who had no place to live. We established food pantries because there were women who were pregnant and had no food to eat. I started sending out my doctors to make house calls on pregnant women, to the homes of pregnant women because it was important for them and us to understand the kinds of lives and difficulties and obstacles that poor women who are pregnant had to overcome. It was more than just riding two or three buses to get to the hospital clinic in this nice, bright, and sterile environment. We had to go see. We had to go to their homes. We had to see what women were struggling with. We had to see that. They had two or three other children at home and may or may not have had a support system. May or may not have had enough food. My have been all living in one room, not having enough money. And, it was important for us to see this other aspect of their lives if we were gonna be able to solve the problem of infant mortality, prematurity, and the kinds of terrible outcomes that our patients were having. And, I think we made a difference. I think we made a difference. We made a difference by expanding the family planning clinics so that women could decide when and where they wanted to have children. How far apart they could space them. We re-established dignity for women, that they knew if they came to us, they could do so, and have confidential private services, and they could be treated with respect and with dignity. We changed, and it wasn't just me, it was, it was a whole group of folk, not only physicians but nurses. We changed the way people looked at patients and treated patients and handled patients. It was respect. I was part of the women's movement. There were feminists amongst us who insisted that patients be treated better. There were physicians amongst us who insisted that patients be treated better. I began to be able to select the doctors who would take care of poor women from Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], Mattapan [Boston, Massachusetts], and Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts], who would take care of those patients when they came to the hospital. It was me. So, I knew who and what I was looking for. We increased dramatically, the number of interns and residents of color who came to Boston City Hospital. By the time I stepped down from being chair, three quarters of my interns and residence were women, and 50 percent were black. Whenever somebody saw a black intern or resident at Boston City Hospital, they would say, they will tell you today, "Oh that must be one of Ken Edelin's [HistoryMaker Kenneth Carlton Edelin]." And, they were. And, people came from all over the country to train in our department because they knew they would learn a different and better way of taking care of patients. And, they knew, and they learned, and they heard that they too as young physicians would be treated with respect, and with dignity, which they might not have gotten in other places. And, I'm proud of what we were able to do. And how we educated young African American doctors in the specialty of obstetrics and gynecology. Story_ID: 268832 Speaker 1: Did you have private practice alongside of your (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Eleven years you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Practice, too? Where'd you-- Speaker 2: I had a private practice. And, I took care of lots of very well-known women who lived in and around Boston [Massachusetts]. And, I had one rule. And, the rule was, I'm happy to take care of you, and I love delivering babies, but, if you're gonna have a baby, then you're gonna have to come to my service at Boston City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts] to have that baby. And, I had two reasons for doing that. One was that it ought to be good enough for everybody. Irrespective of what their economic status was. Irrespective of what their educational level was. So, I had judges and other physicians that I was taken care of, and lawyers, and other profession women. And, the obstetrical service at Boston City Hospital ought to be good enough for everybody. That was number one. Number two, but I also knew that these well-educated women, assertive women, would let me know if they were not treated well. They were not shy. They were not shrinking violets, they would let me know if the care that they were getting from the nurses or the other doctors was not up to what they expected. And, to make it, to take it another step, both of my youngest children were also born at Boston City Hospital when I was the chief there. 'Cause if it's good enough for poor women, it's good enough for my children and my wife [Barbara Evans Edelin] as well. Speaker 1: Okay. The first child was born at Boston City. Her name or his name. It was she, Kimber--? Speaker 2: Joseph [Edelin]. Speaker 1: Joseph. Speaker 2: No. Joseph was the first one born. Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: He was born at Boston City. And, then Corinne [Edelin] was born three years later. Speaker 1: Okay. Let me--Joseph was born what year? Speaker 2: Joseph was born six, five, eighty, 1980; June 5, 1980. Speaker 1: Okay. And then Corinne was 1983? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 269570 Speaker 1: The mother of Joseph [Edelin] and Corinne [Edelin] is? Speaker 2: Barbara [Evans Edelin], my wife. She and I, she and I have been married twenty-seven years. She went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], which is right across the street from Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. I had long, I had been long gone by the time she got there. She is a wonderful woman. She is, she is my soul mate. She's my best friend. She and I met for the first time, right in the middle of my trial. She came to Boston [Massachusetts] to visit some relatives. It was a Super Bowl party that January and she was there, and I stopped by. I couldn't stay long 'cause I was, I was on my way down to my lawyer's office to prepare for trial the next day, that Monday. And, she was there and we met. We kept in touch erratically over that, over that period of time, and each went our separate ways. And, we finally got back together again, twenty-seven years ago; had a very fast courtship. And, one of the best decisions I've ever made in my life. Speaker 1: Tell us about the children you and Barbara have. Speaker 2: Okay. So, Joseph was born in June of 1980, and all of Barbara's friends said, "But, so, where you gonna have your baby?" And, she said, "At [Boston] City Hospital [Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts]." "What, you're gonna have your baby at City Hospital?" "Well my husband is the chief there, of course, I'm gonna have my baby at City Hospital." And, her obstetrician had privileges that Boston Hospital for Women [Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts], and at City Hospital. And, Barbara said, "That's where I'm having my baby." So, Joseph was born June 5, 1980. Difficult delivery, but he was fine. And, he went to the public schools here in Brookline [Massachusetts], and went off to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] where he became Phi Beta Kappa in his junior year as a history major, graduated with honors. So, being born at Boston City Hospital didn't hurt him at all. He is, he has found his passion. And, his passion is to teach sixth and seventh grade at social studies. He absolutely loves it. He is marvelous in the classroom. He is moving to Atlanta [Georgia] because he wants to teach African American sixth and seventh graders social studies. He is a marvelous teacher. He's very smart. Speaker 1: Be sure to tell him about this project. Speaker 2: I am gonna tell him about this project. Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Materials that he will have access to, he could use. Speaker 2: Right. Right. So, he's, he's moving to Atlanta now to teach in a charter school there. That is for African American boys and girls. And, he's gonna be the seventh grade social studies teacher and he very excited about that. Speaker 1: That's great. And-- Speaker 2: Our youngest child Corinne, the baby, was also born at Boston City Hospital, and she was born in 1983. And, she graduates from Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] in just a couple of months, in May of 2005. And, she also is a history major, is a history major, and she will graduate with history honors. And, she is interested in communications and wants to get her master's degree, and has already been accepted to three graduate schools. And, has some wonderful choices to make about where she wants to spend the next year or two getting her master's degree. Speaker 1: That's exciting. Speaker 2: It's very exciting. She's an, she's a wonderful writer. She writes poetry. She has taught me a lot. And, by that I mean, she has--here in the Brookline school system they, they have something called, Chapter, Chapter One. Where they used to take kids who they thought could not learn and isolate them and segregate them and put them in a group together. And, she was in Chapter One for math, because they said she couldn't do math. Well, this is a little girl at three or four used to sit down at the piano and compose music, could play like--and never taken a lesson, and play music like a professional. And, she--and, so I knew she was very smart, and she was my kid after all. And, what I discovered, what I learned from her was what was reinforced because it was something I knew about my own self as well is that, we may, we often teach people in the same way, but not everybody learns in the same way. And, her learning style, whatever that was, did not fit in the way they were trying to force her to learn. And, so I would have arguments with her teachers. We got them to disband this segregation 'cause I, I went into the classroom to see this Chapter One of these, all these kids who couldn't do math. And, they all turned out to be girls, the stereotype of girls not being able to do math and science. And, they all turned out to be girls of color; either black or Hispanic. Which, which is a further stereotype that they were reinforcing. So, she has excelled, once she got out of that. Once we figured out how she learned best, she excelled through the Brookline public school system, and only applied to one school because her oldest sister [Kimberley Edelin Freeman] had gone to Spelman, and she also wanted to go to Spelman. And, she applied to Spelman College, early decision. And, then December of that year, she got accepted. And, the rest, as they say, is history. So, she's getting ready to graduate. Story_ID: 269571 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Kenneth Carlton] Edelin, you've had a long time association with the Planned Parent Federation of America [sic. Planned Parenthood Federation of America]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, you served as the chairperson-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --of the federation. Tell us when you started with Planned Parenthood, and about your role there over the years. Speaker 2: Well, I--after the indictment and after the trail, Planned Parenthood became very active in trying to help me raise money to pay for my legal defense. And, after all of that was over, they asked me to join the board of, of directors for the federation for the nationwide organization. Which I did. And, a couple of years later asked me to become chair. I was just moving into the chairmanship of OB-GYN [obstetrics and gynecology] at Boston City Hospital [(BCH); Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts], and I didn't wanna take on two big jobs and I had a very clear agenda that I wanted to establish at BCH as it was affectingly known then. And, so I declined their first offer to become chair. But, after I've gotten things established and toward the end of my tenure at Boston City Hospital in 1989, they asked me to run for chair again, and, and I did and won. I was selected to be chairman of the board. Planned Parenthood is the largest private family planning agency in the country. It is an international family planning agency. It has over nine hundred family planning clinics, which not only provide contraceptive and abortion services for women, but also a full range of primary healthcare services. It's a place where young women go. It's a place where poor women can go. They have a sliding fee scale. They provide a full range of reproductive healthcare services from pap smears to colposcopy to cancer treatment to early detection and screening, and family planning services. And, they also have a political arm. And, it was during my tenure as chair that we were able to change, or expand the direction of Planned Parenthood from being just a service provider of reproductive healthcare services to becoming to political player in his country. So, we established something called the Planned Parenthood Action Fund, PPAF, which became a 501(c)(4) of an organization that collected money to become involved in the political process in the country. Because it was recognized, and it was clear to all of us that this very private issue about what happens to women's bodies, and the private decisions that women make about their reproductive lives, was really a political issue. And, that if we were going to be able to protect women's privacy and a women's right to choose that we had to become involved in politics and in electoral politics. And, we had always been able to, you know, distribute leaflets and tell which candidates were pro-choice and which were not. But, we couldn't tell people who to vote for. But, with the Action Fund, we could specifically tell people who to vote for, and we could specifically endorse candidates. I was anxious for us to not only endorse local candidates and people running for the [U.S.] House of Representatives or the [U.S.] Senate but, in that, in that year I was very much trying to push the organization to endorse presidential candidates. So, as my chair, chairmanship was winding down, it was the election of Bill Clinton against Bush One [President George Herbert Walker Bush]. And, so, I became very actively involved in that presidential election, and not only for the, for the presidency but also people running for the Senate and the House of Representative, and traveled the country for about a year campaigning on behave of pro-choice candidates. Being involved in Planned Parenthood's activities to get Bill Clinton elected, and to defeat George Bush One. And, it was an exciting year. It was year of politics and travel and excitement and a year of victory. Speaker 1: Good. And, your chairmanship of the Planned Parenthood ended when? When did you--? Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-two [1992]. Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-two [1992]. Okay. The Planned Parenthood Federation, you have an award that you did give, or may still be giving, you gave an award to Senator Ted Kennedy [Senator Edward M. Kennedy]? Is that correct? Speaker 2: Well, actually Planned Parenthood gave the award. They established an award in my name. Speaker 1: Oh, it's in your name. That's-- Speaker 2: It's in my name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But--I think it's called the Champions of Choice, or something like that. And, they gave, yeah, they did give Ted Kennedy one of the Ken Edelin Awards. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, I-- Speaker 2: But, they established it in my name. Speaker 1: Okay. You've cleared up on something I wasn't clear about-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And--whether the award was in your name or not. So, that's clear (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: I noticed he called you, quote, a profile of courage, end quote. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 269572 Speaker 1: The NAACP Legal Defense [and Educational] Fund [LDF], another very important institution in America, and you've had an identity with that. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Would you tell us about--? Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: How you got started on that, and what your role has been, what you've contributed? Speaker 2: I--that's very interesting, and it came about as a result the indictment and the trial and the appeal. My sister [Norma Edelin Johnson], who at the time lived in New York [New York], and went to the head of the Legal Defense Fund, and said, "You folks need to be involved in my brother's appeal." And, you know, Thurgood Marshall was a very strong proponent of choice and voted in--positively in Roe v. Wade [1973]. And, further when the issue [Harris v. McRae, 1980] of Medicaid payment for abortions came before the [U.S.] Supreme Court, he voted in favor of that too. He was a very strong champion of choice. And, Thurgood Marshall started LDF. And, so, my sister went to Jack Greenberg whose was then the head of LDF, and said, you know, "You need to be involved in my brother's case." So, they submitted an amicus brief, on behalf of Ken Edelin [HistoryMaker Kenneth Carlton Edelin] in the appeal process here in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. And, after I won the appeal, they asked me to join the New England committee for LDF, and I agreed to do that. And, then a year or so later, they asked me to be president of the New England committee for LDF, and I said, "Yes. But, I think I could be of even greater value, if I could have a connection with the national board." So, they invited me to join the national board of the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund. And I've been on the national board now for nearly twenty years. Speaker 1: Twenty years. Speaker 2: It's a very important organization. It is the premiere civil rights law firm in the country. We argue more cases before the U.S. Supreme Court than anybody else, except for the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice]. And, it is a natural fit for me, because I see a very strong connection between women's reproductive rights and civil rights in this country. I think both of these movements have come out of a condition in America where one group of people wants to control the bodies of another group of people. And, I see a kinship and a parallelism between fighting that control. Fighting for autonomy. Fighting for freedom. And, whether it's fighting against slavery, the physical ownership of one person of another, or whether it's fight the subjugation of women to men, I see strong parallels. Lot--a lot of my feminist friends, put in particular Gloria Steinem, pointed out to me a very long time ago. That the enemies of women and the enemies of black people are really the same persons. So, my affiliation with LDF and my affiliation with Planned Parenthood [Federation of America] are synchronous. They are for a common purpose. They are for self-determination. They are for freedom, and they are for choices. They're for liberation. And, I enjoy my association with both the pro-choice movement and the Civil Rights Movement (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Story_ID: 269573 Speaker 1: I attended the March on Washington back in 1963. I was there. I was there when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was standing on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.] to give his speech. I was there. Not in my wildest imagination did I ever think that I too would be standing on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial giving a talk to a million people. And, I've been able to do that twice. Speaker 2: Tell me about those two occasions. The first one? Speaker 1: The first one, Molly Yard [Mary Alexander Yard], who was president of the National Organization for Women [NOW], heard me speak at a rally in upstate New York. They were--this was the first mobilization for women's lives and they were gonna have this march on Washington [D.C.], pro-choice march. And, it was--she heard me speak and it was just before the presidential elections, and she said, "You gotta come talk to our crowd." I have a wonderful picture, which I will show you later, of me standing on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial [Washington, D.C.] delivering a speech to what some people say was seven, 800,000 people. And, I was in the front of the line when we actually marched. I was there carrying a banner. Holding up the banner along with Gloria Steinem, and [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters, and, and other people that, whose friendship I had made over the years. And, then the second time, was several years after that when we marched again in Washington for women's rights. And, so, being on the, being on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial has lots of significance for me. Not only, and I'm gonna take you really back, not only did I have the opportunity to speak on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial, and not only did I go to the March on Washington in August of 1963 to hear A. Philip Randolph, [HistoryMaker] John Lewis, who baptized us, by the way, black. There was a lot of controversy about what we were being called. And, Roy Wilkins and A. Philip Randolph and other folks wanted--they keep referring to us as Negro. And, John Lewis, who I would meet again in Nashville [Tennessee] when I was at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], called us black. So, we were baptized black on that day. But, also on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial, on April 7, 1939, [sic. April 9, 1939] Marian Anderson sang, because she was denied access to Constitution Hall [Washington, D.C.] by the Daughters of the American Revolution [DAR]. The greatest contralto of the century could not sing at Constitution Hall because she was black. And, my father [Benedict Edelin] was there in celebration of my birth one week before he went to listen to Marian Anderson sing. Because he was outraged that she was not able to sing at Constitution Hall, and he wanted to be there. So it's a long connection. Story_ID: 269574 Speaker 1: Anything else you wanna add to this interview that I haven't asked you about? Speaker 2: We've talked for a long time, gee. I think we've covered it, I think we've covered it. You think we've covered it? Speaker 1: Well, definitely, definitely. A few wrap up questions. How do you feel the about the way you have lived your life? Speaker 2: How do I feel about the (laughter) way I've lived my life. I think the way I've lived my life--I've loved my life. I wouldn't change a thing. There'd been, there's been pain, but there's, but there's been a great deal of happiness. There's been a lot of professional satisfaction. To be able to--being a physician is like no other profession. Being able to deliver a baby, is, is still an experience of wonderment and awe. It is, it is breathtaking. Being able to save somebody's life, being able to stop people from, who are in pain from having pain. There is no greater calling than that. I loved every moment of it, when I was practice. I missed children's birthdays. I had to give up Christmas dinners. I had to get up from Thanksgiving dinners or events I couldn't attend because my patients were in labor and need me. I've delivered children of friends, who are now grown and having their own children. So, it has been a very, very rewarding life. I've, I think I've noticed that the characteristic that I have, which has served me well, and sometimes has not served me well, is to be very direct and honest. I think the one characteristic that I see in people around me that I cannot stand, is hypocrisy. People to preach one time but to do another is hypocrisy. And, when I see it, I get enraged. When we talk about the sanctity of life and I see people abusing little children, that enrages me. When we talk about ending or curtailing women's access to abortion and I see conservatives taking their girlfriends or their mistresses or going themselves to have abortions, that enra- that enrages me. It is hypocrisy. I have performed abortions on the wives and girlfriends of people who have been activists in the abortion anti-choice movement; I personally have. And, that kind of hypocrisy enrages me. It is hypocrisy, and it's about controlling, trying to control somebody else's life. So, I'm, I tend to be confrontational. I tend to speak the truth as I see it. I--and it sometimes gets me in trouble. But, I have to do what I believe is right so that I can continue to live within this skin, and within this body, and within this value system that I have. Story_ID: 269575 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you still want to do that you haven't yet done? Speaker 2: I want to finish my book. As you know, writers say that the first draft is garbage and you've gotta--and the art of writing is writing and rewriting and rewriting. And, I'm in the rewriting stage. And, that I will get done. I think there is another chapter in my life. I haven't quite figured out what it will be. I love doing what I am doing now with young people who wanna be physicians and helping them achieve their goals and their dreams. I wanna figure out how I can expand that so that I can have that opportunity for more people than who have it now. I wanna do something about the tragedy of what's happening to African American boys and men in this country. Out of 16,000 first year medial students in the entire United States, 16,000 there are only 380 black men; first year medical students. Same thing is true in law schools. The same thing is true in engineering. The same thing is true in business. Everywhere you look, we are a vanishing part of the human family, except in one place. And, that is in the prison system. In state and federal prisons, we are over represented. Half of all people incarcerated in this country now are people of color, and most of those are black men. My children and who are in education, two of them, tell me that the destruction begins in fourth grade. I reflect back over my own life and the positive reinforcement and the expansion of opportunities that I got from my fourth grade teacher [at Lovejoy School, Washington, D.C.], and I see what's happening to young black boys early in their education and how they are being thwarted and how their lives are being truncated and how opportunities being denied them as early as fourth grade. We need to do something about that. So, if I could do something else in my life, it would be to figure out how we're gonna stop this loss of black boys and young black men. The country needs their talents and our talent. Story_ID: 269576 Speaker 1: Last question. [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Kenneth Carlton] Edelin, how would you like--how do you want to be remembered? Speaker 2: I think I'd like to be remembered as someone, to use perhaps an overused phrase, who tried to speak truth to power. Tried to stand up for people who couldn't stand up for themselves. To try to help those who have been locked out of our society, gain access to the opportunities that are promised to everybody by the Constitution of the United States of America. That's how I would like to be remembered. Story_ID: 269287 Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my mother when she was a young woman in her twenties, I guess; Ruby Marguerite Goodwin Edelin. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Go ahead. Speaker 1: This was a family reunion that we had on Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts]. And, on the right standing in the back is my older brother, Milton [Edelin]. And, his family is there. He has two sons and his wife. My brother-in-law, J. Johnson standing next to my sister Norma [Johnson], and that's me with my arm around my sister, and my wife, Barbara [Evans Edelin] in the back. And, then crowded around in the front are our children. My son, sons, Kenny [Kenneth Edelin, Jr.], and Joseph [Edelin], and Corrine [Edelin], and Kimberley [Edelin Freeman], and Greg [ph.] and Ronald [ph.], my nephews and Marguerite [ph.], my niece. So, those are the--in the back are the older, the older of us, and in the front are our offspring, our children. We had a--it was a great family reunion on Martha's Vineyard about fifteen years ago. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is a picture of my wife Barbara and me. My wife of twenty-seven years. Barbara Evans Edelin. We've have a wonderful twenty-seven years together. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my wife, Barbara and my daughter Corrine. And, this was at the March for Women's Lives that was held in Washington, D.C. two years ago. They were right down in front along with one million other of our closest friends. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Laughter). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: And, this is me speaking in front of those one million people giving what what by all accounts was a pretty rousing speech at, at the March for Women's Lives in Washington, D.C. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. Okay, ready. Speaker 2: This is a picture of my wife Barbara, Elaine [R.] Jones, who was then director counsel of the NAACP, the Legal Defense and Education[al] Fund [LDF], and President [William Jefferson] Bill Clinton at a reception in New York [New York]. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): The year? Speaker 2: That was in, that was about two years ago, so that would be about 2002, I think. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): All right, ready. Speaker 2: This is an ad that developed when I was chair of the board of Planned Parenthood Federation of America. And, it was an ad designed to grab attention but to also show that freedom of choice was not just an issue for women, but it was also an issue for men. And, in particular, African American men because during the days of illegal abortion, it was African American women who died most frequently and most tragically from illegal abortion. So, we have, in this ad, we had [HistoryMaker] Earl [G.] Graves [Sr.], who is the owner and publisher of Black Enterprise mas- magazine; [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis, late great actor who was a very strong supporter of a women's right to choose; Joe [Louis] Barrow [Jr.], the son of Joe Louis; [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks, the photographer, producer, cinematographer, also a very strong supporter of a women's right to choose; Wynton Marsalis, the classical and jazz trumpet player; Al Poussaint [Dr. Alvin Poussaint], the Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] psychiatrist; Victor Dates, who is an attorney from Detroit [Michigan] and also a Planned Parenthood board member at the time. And, Earl "The Pearl" Monroe, who is a basketball player and now a businessman and entrepreneur. And, the ad was ran in Ebony magazine, Jet, Essence magazine, and it was very effective. We got a lot of positive feedback from the ad, in addition to people joining by calling the 1-800 number, joining the Planned Parenthood Action Fund which was our, our political arm of Planned Parenthood. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: Well, tell us about the whole collection and how that happened? Speaker 1: Okay. This was a (laughter), this was a collage put together by my wife for my sixty-fifth birthday, which was a wonderful birthday celebration and she went through and found some old photographs of me and put 'em together in this nice collage. There you see a picture of me as a baby. I was less than a year old; sitting on the table in Washington, D.C. when somebody took that picture. And, I was a cowboy fan, and I had a pair of silver guns and I was, I think, Hopalong Cassidy at the time. There's a picture of me at the beach; the skinny, scrawny kid that I was. We don't need to, we don't need to do the fat one there next to the pool. That's me getting my degree from Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], down there. That's a graduation from medical school where I was, where I got my medical degree in 1967. (Laughter) And that was a-- Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 1: That's just a, a, a brief stint as a model; modeling, I think, a coat (laughter). Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. (Unclear). Speaker 1: Okay. And, that's me speaking at a rally from--I was standing on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial speaking to pro-choice rally in Washington, D.C. And, I was--that was heading into the election in 1990. Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And, you're (unclear) about that. Speaker 1: That's me in my academic regalia at Boston University School of Medicine [Boston, Massachusetts] where I am the head marshal and I lead the procession in. And, I've been doing that for about ten years...