 Story_ID: 7033 Speaker 1: You know, spell it for us, your full name even with the H. Speaker 2: All right. My name is Floyd Harold Flake born January 30th, 1945. Speaker 1: I need you to spell your name. Speaker 2: F-L-O-Y-D H-A-R-O-L-D F-L-A-K-E. Speaker 1: And I want you to give today's date. Speaker 2: Today is September 15th, 2001. Speaker 1: And our location? Speaker 2: We're at the [Greater] Allen Cathedral in Jamaica, New York. Speaker 1: Address? Speaker 2: 11031 Merrick Boulevard. Speaker 1: And your profession? Speaker 2: I am a clergyman and president of an educational management organization called Edison Schools [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: They're charter schools, aren't they? Are they charter? Speaker 2: We're devout charter and contract. Story_ID: 7034 Speaker 1: And--okay--I ask five questions of everyone, they're sort of 'People' magazine-ish, so this is just the beginning, but I'd like to know what your favorite food is. Speaker 2: My favorite food is baked salmon, black-eyed peas, and carrots. I eat a lot of raw vegetables, and so I pretty much like things that are not fatty and not--I eat too many sweets, of course. I like all cakes and cookies and pies. Speaker 1: See, that's good. You're not totally perfect. Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm not, not at all. No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Favorite color? Speaker 1: I'm not sure that I have a favorite color. Over the years I've kind of said blue, but I think as age has set in I've started to drift a little more and become a little more colorful, partly at the insistence and direction of my wife [Reverend Margaret Elaine McCollins Flake]. Speaker 2: Favorite time of year? Speaker 1: My favorite time of year is the fall. It's not too hot. It's not too cold, and unlike the spring, it's not rainy so it's a good season. I don't need a coat, but a sweater will suffice, and it's--I like that season. Speaker 2: And favorite vacation place? Speaker 1: My favorite vacation place has now become a cruise. Generally of late the last two have been to the Caribbean [Sea], and that's been wonderful. I never went on a cruise before. My wife got me to go, and now I am positioned to go on my third cruise because it is the one place I can get away from everything for a short period of time and just refocus, think about the kind of things I want to do futuristically, and then try to put meat on the kind of visions that I receive, and by the time I come off of the ship, I'm genuinely ready and energized to go and do even greater things. Speaker 2: Yeah, I went on my first cruise. I actually enjoyed it much more than I thought. Speaker 1: I did. I did. My wife kept telling me we have to go, and I just said, "No, not out there on the water, and I've got too much to do," and what I've found was that you need these kind of respites from this everyday running and hustling and working. Speaker 2: We're gonna ask this one. We have to get this situated. Okay, and just my last question is, what it your--do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 1: I guess my favorite phrase would be a scripture in Timothy [2 Tim. 1:7] which says, "God has not given me the spirit of fear but of power and of love and a sound mind," and it is a favorite in part because I realize how easily one can be immobilized by fears and then do what many do, and that is not take the kind of risk that leads to some measure of success, and then I've learned the value of love, especially from the perspective of a pastor, and I realize that you can intimidate people, and they will work hard for you one time and then disappear. You can love people, and people keep coming back asking what more they can do for you as you continue to do for them, and then this power that God has given us helps us to be able to use the mind that we have to do almost anything that we can conceive. Story_ID: 7035 Speaker 1: What motivated you to write that book, I mean the book in the first place? Speaker 2: I think the motivation for the book was centered around people constantly asking questions about how do you do so many things? What was your life like? Who were your mentors? What advice do you give people who are trying to get their life together so that they can try to move in the realm of some kind of success, and over the years I just kept saying I just need to put this into some kind of document so because I don't have time to answer the questions when people are calling, and they just want to have a conversation so I felt that the best way to do it was to do it in a book, and one of the things that I think motivated the title itself, 'The Way of the Bootstrapper,' is the fact that I considered Booker T. Washington to be one of the most misinterpreted of the black stars and heroes of African American history and so much so that because of the nature of the W.E.B. [William Edward Burghardt] DuBois-Booker Washington debates about who represented what people oftentimes kind of relegate him to a place merely defined by his emphasis on vocational without dealing with the reality that he was as much a proponent of education or even more so than DuBois in that he built Tuskegee Institute [later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and here, generations after his death, that institution is still producing young people with skills and competencies in areas that very few other institutions does, and that is particularly true in the area of having one of the few veterinarian programs in the nation, let alone perhaps the only one at an African American college, and so I used that title because I think this whole bootstrapping idea, self help, certainly is within my tradition, Richard Allen, the founder of the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Church, and it's certainly within the construct of what I think has defined us as a people prior to the 1960s when we adopted what I call a new modality that did not emphasize self help but is really built around the notion that the government has within itself the resources to be able to empower and liberate people, and I wanted to try and move people away from that notion with an understanding that yes, government has resources, but ultimately it is your responsibility to decide for yourself what you're going to do and then develop a kind of planning strategy that allows you to fulfill whatever kind of pursuits and purposes you feel you have. Speaker 1: The process of writing a book--anything that you learned or were there any sort of surprises in the whole process? Speaker 2: I won't say there were surprises. I think my writing the book was an interesting process to the degree that I wrote it while I was still serving in [United States] Congress. I never had an apartment in Washington [D.C.] so I came home almost nightly, and the resources I needed to do it required of me to basically, just as I did with my dissertation for my doctorate, take over my dining room table. I am technologically challenged in that I don't do the computer so I was doing this longhand yellow legal pad version, and so I had to do my materials in such a way that I could get them back here to my secretary who had to obviously interpret it, and that meant spending countless hours. Many nights I'd come home and sleep two or three hours and then get up and write all night and then fly back to Washington, but in the end it was a worthwhile venture because I think it allowed me to codify much of my thinking about how people are able to do things for themselves coming out of the kind of background that I did where it is not expected that you would be able to achieve a lot in life. Story_ID: 7036 Speaker 1: Reverend Flake, I would like to go as I typically go at the beginning into your family, and I'd like - do you know where your name came from, you know, Flake, what that name even? Speaker 2: No, it is interesting that there is a group out in a place called Snowflake, Arizona, that's been trying to pull together this whole notion of where Flake came from. These are whites, but of course, you know, in our history that is definitely possible that you have those kind of relationships. We always thought that, and we were taught when we were young, that our descendants were basically of Indian and African slave heritage. As we got older, as a matter of fact, just two years ago, as I was talking to my aunt who reminded me that a part of our family really are white in that they actually pass for white so that my grandfather's brother who is very, very fair-skinned who used to come around with his children very infrequently when we had family reunions and other events, and my aunt has just told me that the reason for that is that they passed for white, and so their association with us was very limited. They were part of the family but not a part of the family, and actually on their name you will find that they have an S so they are Flakes, and then the darker side of the family is Flake without the S, and that's how they actually put the name, put the S on their names. Where the name evolved, I have no idea. I'm sure that, given that the majority of the Flakes evolved from around Brenham [Texas] and Bellville [Texas] and New Ulm, Texas, that somewhere there was probably a property owner that had that name and gave it to the family. Story_ID: 7037 Speaker 1: So your father, give us his name, and would you--so he was around that area? Speaker 2: Yeah, my father's Robert Booker Flake, and he is-- my grandfather, Garfield, and my grandmother on his side, Pearline, they had sixteen children. He grew up in the country right in New Ulm [Texas], and they had a tremendous homestead, big acreage of property. We used to go there, and we'd hunt. They had hogs and chickens and cows and everything. What I find interesting about that is, as I look in retrospect, how did a person, first generation out of slavery, accumulate property? I mean one of the things that we oftentimes forget is that these people understood the value of property even when they worked the property for somebody else, and so one of the things that they tried to acquire immediately after slavery was property, and you know, so on that side. On the other side, my mother, Rosalie Johnson is her maiden name. They come out of Brenham, Texas which is within, I guess, about ten miles of New Ulm [Texas] and Bellville [Texas] so most of them--Papa [Garfield Flake] was a laborer, worked in a factory that actually produced chicken feed, and then I'd watch them in the evenings when he'd come, and he'd be mowing the lawn, and every Sunday morning I watched him as he was under the tree and shaving with that razor and Sunday morning singing, and Sunday, though, he was in the church. He was in the choir. He was a steward in Ward Chapel A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Church [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas]. Mama [Pearline Flake] made sure that all of us went to church every Sunday because even when my mother, who gave birth to five of us, each right one year after apart from each other, but Mama made sure that we got to church, and so we called her 'Mama'. That's my grandmother on that side so we've always been deeply in church. When we'd go up home, that's New Ulm, and we call that up home, which is down in the country, everybody came, and under the tree we'd have church at some point during the day. In the evening before everybody left they took out the washboards, and they took out the foot tubs, and those became musical instruments, and they had their fiddles, and we'd have church, and I think that's where a lot of the impetus for my going into ministry probably started because as a real young child, they would have me doing recitations, and by the time I was ten I was obviously totally engaged and immersed in church in some form or fashion, but it was largely because that's where my grandparents were. That's where my parents were, and I tend to think the value of that experience has been a tremendous contributor to what my life is today. Story_ID: 7038 Speaker 1: Describe your father, just what type of person he was. Speaker 2: Daddy - my daddy [Robert Booker Flake] was--my four sisters have been here this week, and it's interesting how they keep remarking of how much like Daddy I am. A very tempered person--I'm sure he had times when he was upset, but you would never know it. He worked on average three jobs, worked a full-time job as a laborer in a place that produced floor tile for awhile, and then he worked out in the oil fields, he and his brothers, because as each of them got a job, they'd send back for the other brothers, and they all came up out of the country, and so for a long time he did that, but while he was working in the oil fields, he had--all of them could work on automobiles. They could take a car apart in a weekend so my father had all tools so he worked in some mechanical area while he was out in the oil fields, but then the company he worked for - in the evenings he actually came back into the city. They came on a bus because they left like five in the morning so they would finish about three so by--we'd come home. We had to be home. We'd have to eat dinner with Daddy, and then he'd take his nap. Then he'd get up, and then he'd take the boys to the night job, and the night job was cleaning up office buildings starting with the office building for the company he worked for so we all learned how to do maintenance work both at home because Mother [Rosalie Johnson Flake] did not have boy jobs and girl jobs. We all had assignments so we'd wake up in the mornings. One week I may have the bathroom. The next week I may have the bedroom. The next week I may have breakfast because we cooked hot breakfast every day with cream of wheat, oatmeal, grits, something every morning, and then Daddy--because he taught us how to do work early in life. If you look at my family now, the living brothers and sisters were all pretty much workaholics because we saw him work those two or three jobs. We saw Mother work all day around the house, and dinner was ready by the time we got home in the afternoons until we got an age where she required us to cook. We were on cooking rotation so we could cook cornbread from scratch. We could cook almost anything, and then daddy--on the weekends he would be there. He had fixed--rigged the garage in a way. We bought one of those VA [Veterans Administration] homes, and he had fixed the garage in such a way where he had his rig. He could actually pull an engine out of a car and work on it to have it ready by Monday morning, I mean, and it was the most fascinating thing. He used to tell me "Son, you need to learn this". I did not want to do mechanic work because it was just too dirty so I never learned to do that, but he used to tell me that what they will charge you for labor, you can save that if you learn to do your own work. Well, today I rue the fact that I did not learn that kind of experience, but Sunday morning Daddy was right there in church. He took time off from whatever work he was doing, made his way to church. Once he joined the church, he stopped drinking. He stopped smoking. He always drank beer, only beer for the most part anyway, and Mother was just--I mean Mother made sure that Daddy got us to Sunday School. Daddy would come back home, and he'd get up Sunday morning, wash the car, use that Magic Shave and do his shaving, and then he'd take us to Sunday School. Then he'd come back and then bring mother to church for 11:00 [A.M. service] so we had a good, loving family environment, and quite frankly we didn't even know we were poor until we got older. I was an adult before I knew I had been poor growing up because we had food every day. We had rice and beans and cornbread. We didn't have meat every day, but we didn't know that you were supposed to have meat every day. We had dessert on Sunday. We ate breakfast together before we went to Sunday School on Sunday mornings so what we may have lacked financially, the financial poverty didn't define us because mother and daddy never talked about being poor. We knew that they were stretching, making ends meet from week to week, and I knew it because my responsibility, even starting at about ten or eleven o'clock [A.M.], I was the shopper. My mother could write a list. She knew where everything was in the store, and so she would write specifically what she wanted so she wanted [chicken] giblets, whole kernel corn, and she could price it out. She knew the exact price of it, and the only place where there was left with some flexibility was she wanted three fish, and in Texas there's a fish called drum fish. That's mostly what we ate, and so she would give an approximate price, and I would ask for three fish approximately such weight so that it would fall in that category or chickens or whatever, but everything else was priced out, and I mean they were just--they were phenomenal. When people ask me who's your mentors, I say my parents, and when I listened to my children as they gave testimonies this weekend on our twenty-fifth anniversary, what they say is, you know, people can never say--nobody could ever say that our daddy's been absent, and when he is home, he's writing a sermon. He's got the dishwasher going. He's got the washing machine going. He's got some meat on in the oven, as was the case this morning before I came here, so I learned that from them because we were family, and home life was important, and I've tried to take the best of what Mother and Daddy offered us and give it to my kids. Story_ID: 7039 Speaker 1: And your mother, her name? Speaker 2: Rosalie, Rosalie Johnson. Speaker 1: And what kind of person would you describe her as? Speaker 2: My mother was a very strong disciplinarian. When she said do something, you did it. We were laughing about the fact of remembrance of the whizzing house shoes. She had no reluctance in flinging it or the orders to go and get a switch, and the psychological beating we took bringing the switch back, knowing we'd get a whipping with it, but just my mother - we had - giving birth to that many children, we all took responsibility for each other, and with Mother being a housewife because one reason Dad [Robert Booker Flake] had those jobs is because Mother didn't work. I have sisters who are ages--I'm 56. I have a sister 55, a sister 54, a sister 53, and a sister 52 so I mean they had us back to back to back, and Mother basically managed the family, and we knew we could not fight. We knew that there was punishment for fighting. We were required to do homework under her tutelage, and even though she was only sixth grade educated, she may not have known what we were actually working on, but we were working on something all the time, and of course, whichever boy went to work with Daddy, they did their homework at the office where we worked because Daddy would sleep, we would work, and then we would have to stay there till like ten or eleven o'clock so then we'd do homework, but it was Mother. Mother was the strength of the family because Daddy had to be working. Mother was the one who was there. She was everything to us, and you know, it's regrettable she died so young, but she had the last child, and the doctor told her she should not have anymore children, and her health began to fail after that but just a beautiful lady. Speaker 1: How did you end up being born in Los Angeles? Speaker 2: I was born in Los Angeles [California]. Daddy was in the army, and it was--he got drafted. It was near the end of the war. He was sent to Los Angeles because he was flat-footed, and he was there working. They sent him to work in some army hospital in the Los Angeles area, and so I was born in Los Angeles General [hospital]. I'm the only child of the first children that were born, of the first seven or eight, that was born in a hospital. All the rest of the children were actually born at home, and we used to see as the nurse came. We knew Mother was pregnant again, but they came back because then he was discharged because of the flat-footedness, and then he came right back to Texas, and my sister--I was born January 30th [1945]. She was born the next February 14th so we were back in Texas within about six months after I was born. Speaker 1: Your mother was pregnant the whole time. Speaker 2: My mother was pregnant. I mean we are so close in age, and in that there are several sets of twins. One set of twins did not live near the end, and then there is one sister who is living whose twin did not live, and then there's a sister between my older brother who is 58 and myself--he's 59--and myself, and she died from what they called back then yellow jaundice when she was three years old so we don't have that much of a memory of her, but that means that between my 59-year-old brother, a sister who would now be 57, and I'm 56, a sister 55, 54, 53, and 52 so we really--she was--I mean I think her body just gave out by the time that last child was born which did not live. She had just given out. Speaker 1: Can I have your siblings' names and the order? Speaker 2: Okay. The order of those that are living, Robert is 58. Dorothy, my sister, is 55. Faye is 54. Linda is 53, and Donald, my brother, is 52, and then there is a jump. Dennis is 49, and Sandra, which we call the baby daughter, is--what did she tell me the other day--45, and there were twins between her and the 49, and those are the ones that are living. Speaker 1: And you are - so are you the second oldest? Speaker 2: I am the second oldest of the living. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well, but there were three. Speaker 2: I'm the third oldest child. Story_ID: 7040 Speaker 1: Now you - in the book you talk about your earliest memory, and I was wondering if you could just sort of recount that. You say your earliest memory was when you were three, but is that? That's. Speaker 2: That's--let's see, what? I'm trying to remember what that was. Speaker 1: You said. Speaker 2: Yeah. I think at three years old we were living in a part of town called Third Ward [Houston, Texas]. That's where Daddy [Robert Booker Flake] and his brothers all lived next door to each other. We were on Elgin, E-L-G-I-N, Street, and all of the brothers actually had--either they owned or they lived with each other, and we were living with Daddy's oldest sister's family on that block, and he--and her husband is the one who had the bus so all--there were six brothers who got on that bus every morning, and I can remember that vividly, and I remember at three because you could crawl under the house. The house was sitting on blocks, and as I think back on it now, I'm often saying, you know, anything could have been under that house, but you didn't think about things like that, and I remember by the time I was--and it is at three or four where I had done something, and Mother [Rosalie Johnson Flake] was going to whip me, and I ran, and I have this scar that is here, and it is a burn scar that has grown with me over the years because I fell on one of those kerosene heaters, and I guess that's why I remembered that stage of my life so well, and by five we had moved from there out to an area called Acres Home [Acres Homes, Houston, Texas] to live with my mother's mother and father, and that's when I remember Papa [grandfather, Garfield Flake] and feeding the hens and feeding the chickens, and then we moved in to the VA [Veterans Administration] home that Daddy bought. From five years old we were in our own home. Story_ID: 7041 Speaker 1: Now share some other stories of growing up. You know, let's say from five years on but in the family. Can you just share some? Speaker 2: Sure, I think, and I guess this relates to where I am in life now. As we moved from the home of my grandparents [Garfield and Pearline Flake], we moved into our own home, VA-subsidized [Veterans Administration] home [in Acres Homes, Houston, Texas] which allowed Daddy [Robert Booker Flake] to buy a place with--I don't think there was any downpayment so this whole neighborhood was built under that FHA/VA program [Federal Housing Administration/Veterans Administration], and we had a backyard. We had a front yard, and of course, we had a yard at Mama's [grandmother Pearline], but I mean we shared the yard with the chickens so this was different, and we had an indoor toilet for the first time in my life, and this was an experience because when I had spent the first five years of my life taking the pot out in the morning and dancing my way through the weeds at night to get out to the outhouse, and we had an indoor toilet, which was a big thing for many of the other members of our family, my father's sisters and brothers, some of whom had not been able to come to a place where they could afford this kind of home, and although it was a two-bedroom house, Daddy and Mother [Rosalie Johnson Flake] were--I mean their ingenuity was just tremendous in that they bought bunk beds so that the girls could sleep in the room in the bunk beds, and they bought--as I recall this, there was one double bed in the room, and several girls slept there, and then they had these rollaway beds, and what the boys did was we took the rollaway beds, rolled them into the living room and into the kitchen, and we did that nightly, and it's interesting. By the time we left for school in the mornings, the beds were fixed. The rollaway beds were put away in their place side by side, and we would turn the rollaway bed up, and I don't know whether you remember those kind of rollaway beds, and latch it, and then we would take the spread and actually put it over the rollaway bed so that everything in the room was neat, and we didn't play in the living room. The living room had--we had those covers that people used to buy and put on the furniture so if we played in the living room, it was because Mother had gone grocery shopping or something. We knew better, and boy, by the time--if we saw that car coming back up the block, we were rushing to get that living room cleaned up or any room because we weren't supposed to play on the furniture, and then what we did, we played games. I mean our family was the--our home was the home everybody came. We didn't grow much grass in our yard because other kids could come and play with us so we--and I was the preacher. I started preaching probably around five or six. I'd preach funerals. I'd kill rats. I'd kill snakes, little snakes that were crawling around in our backyard, and we'd have a funeral. My sisters would put on my mother's old dresses and her old shoes, and we'd actually have church. They were my choir. They were everything. Everything we had seen on Sunday morning, we imitated that in the back yard, and in that we learned a lot. I mean we learned how to speak. We learned how to preach. We learned how to sing. Whatever we do today, we learned to do. My sister, my oldest sister, the fifty-five year old, started doing her sister's hair, her own hair and her sister's hair, by the time she was eight years old, and so my mother did their hair while they were real young, and then Dorothy would take them over, and now she has a very profitable cosmetology business because she did that. I mean she has an insurance license and a lot of other stuff, but this is her primary income now, and it's just amazing when I look back at it, how what we did contributed to us. My fifty-four year old sister, because she always wanted new things, she started making her own clothes when she was just a child, and now she makes bridal gowns and all kinds of other stuff so, you know, our life was about - and I guess the word you used earlier, industrious. We learned that then, and except for one of my brothers, we all have that same kind of industry about us even today. I don't think that we'd be marginally successful if we had not known those kind of skills with that combination of work and play that defined us as children. Story_ID: 7042 Speaker 1: What type of child were you? You know, were you bright? Were you shy? Were you rambunctious? Were you mischievous? Were you? Speaker 2: Very mischievous. Interestingly, I mean I'd do stupid stuff, not criminal stuff but stupid stuff--unplug the ice cream machine at school on Friday to see if the ice cream would melt, turn the water on on Friday to see if the school would be flooded by Monday. The worst thing--the last whipping I got was at the age of thirteen, and that was for putting sugar in a man's gas tank, and fortunately Daddy [Robert Booker Flake] was a mechanic, and he drained the line, but after he had awakened me about 5:00 [A.M.] before he went to work one morning and whipped me in a way that let me know I didn't want to be whipped again in life, but I will never forget it, and of course, you know, then when people whipped you, it was--every lick was it's hurting me more than it's hurting you, and I'm doing this because I love you so that you won't be in trouble later in life, but that whipping did a lot for me, and it is interesting in a strange kind of way because it probably drew me and Daddy--we were close, but we probably got closer because on the way to work I can recall that was a day I had to go to work with him. I got a whipping at five in the morning, and by four in the evening I'm in the car, and we have to drive across town to go to work, and he lectured me all the way on why he had to whip me, and I'll just never forget that day because that day may have been a good time in my life because I think I became a little more focused. I dealt with--by the time I was fifteen, I was preaching because I began to put all of myself into the church, and I think that's, you know, that's just where God's destiny was for me, and it took Daddy to kind of help me realize that. He loved what I did in church. He loved to come and hear me do those little speeches so I guess in some ways defining myself, I was probably--my sisters would say I was Mother's [Rosalie Johnson Flake] pet, and that's in large measure because my older brother was always out working. I mean he went to school. He worked. He caddied in the evenings at the Champions Country Club [Houston, Texas], and he always had a night job waiting tables or doing something, and I was younger. I'm the one who did the groceries. I'm the one who did the shopping. One year I had to be home from school for a whole year. My teachers were wonderful. Mrs. Brice brought my homework to me every Friday and picked it up, but I was home with Mother, and I learned. I cleaned up everything every day. I mean I was doing something, not because she made me do it, but I was busy, and I did the homework. I'd have my homework ready Friday. I looked for--wait for the homework to come, but I mean I would go in the kitchen. I'd take the stove apart and clean it from top to bottom. I would do--we had one of those what they called Chambers ranges. I don't know whether you know about that stove. That stove lasted for years and years or I'd be in there cleaning tile or I'd be in there - I mean I can mop and wax and do all that stuff, and I couldn't go because I had--I'm not sure what they call it today, but it was kind of a break-out. It was like ringworms, and it was in my hair. My hair was falling out then, and the doctor didn't want me to be in proximity to other children, and I stayed home that whole year until the end, until May, from September 'til May, and I remember that because when I went to school, it was for what they call the maypole. I went, and I participated in the program, the wrapping of the maypole, and the way you do the do-si-do and all that. What do you call that dance, the country western thing, but I think I emerged probably as a leader during that time because even though I couldn't go to school, I would be at home cooking. I would be at--I would go to the grocery store. I ran to the store for all the neighbors. I did--I learned everybody's - everybody in the community, I knew their license plate number. I mean just learning things, and I don't know why, but I did so it was - I think I was probably viewed then as kind of the leader of the family. My brother left at seventeen to go to the Air Force so I - they see me kind of as the older brother because I was the one there. By the time I got to high school, I was responsible for them because they came immediately behind me into high school, and I could not come home without Dorothy and Faye being home also so if they were--they both were majorettes. One was a majorette. One was a cheerleader. I could not come. I was a manager for the football team so regardless of how we got separated, if I got home first, I sat on that front porch and waited for them to come home, and I did not go in the house without them so I was kind of like big brother to them. Speaker 1: When you were off that one year, were you - did you feel - how old were you at that time? Speaker 2: I was in the - Miss Brice taught the third and fourth grade so I was in the fourth grade. Speaker 1: Did you feel like, you know, ostracized or like funny or? No, you just - you knew something was wrong that you, you know, you were there? Speaker 2: Yeah, it didn't trouble me. Speaker 1: Did you live inside your mind in any way, you know, or imagine things or, you were just sort of busy doing things? Speaker 2: Busy doing. I just - I mean I never even viewed myself as being sick. I just used that time, and that's probably - that year probably was a good year for me. I don't know, but it probably was, I mean, because I was honor student from the fifth grade through the eighth. I mean I was - you know, because I was - in many ways I had the full attention of my teacher every Friday afternoon, and when I got back in school that next year, I stayed on the honor roll. I stayed on the honor roll until I got in high school and started messing around with the football team and track and then went through - I guess my sophomore-junior year were - I mean my freshman-sophomore year was slow but then picked up. By the time I was in my junior year, I was preaching and definitely disciplined and committed and knew then that I wanted to go to college and knew that if I really was going to go, I had to work on getting good grades, and even though I had a job in the evenings. I was working at Guido's Restaurant as a bus boy initially and then a pot washer and then a waiter, but those jobs helped me because I had to work my way through college, and by the time I got to college, I had those skills, and I worked in the cafeteria all four years of college and two years of seminary. Story_ID: 7043 Speaker 1: Now I want to go back just and clear up a few things for clarification. One is were you--your parents move in to, you know, the home. Speaker 2: Subdivision. Speaker 1: Subdivision. Speaker 2: Yeah, subdivision. Speaker 1: Where is that? Speaker 2: This is in Houston [Texas]. It was a place called Garden City Park, and a guy just built like Levittown, New York. I mean he built about 200 homes in there. They're still there, and those families that moved in, for the most part, there was a veteran in the family, but it was a community that had the teachers. Some of my teachers lived in that community. Doctor Johnson lived in that community, and a whole lot of folk who worked at the post office because that was the job so when you went into their living rooms, they generally had the schemes in the living room where they were practicing, either to take the test or after they got the postal job, I think they had to constantly redo the scheme so they would know what they were doing when they were working, but it was that kind of community where you had the civil servant types, teachers. We had a couple of--I don't think we had police. Yeah, we had somebody on the sheriff's department so it was a total community. We had the poor people, and you had the people who by definition at that time at this time would be considered middle class. Speaker 1: And did you--in--what was Houston--do you remember the Houston that you grew up with? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, very well. Speaker 1: What was Houston like then? Speaker 2: Oh, it was--I mean it was a different world from what it has become. Houston had its segregated wards, one through six, and then there were communities like mine, Acres Home, Studewood, Kashmere Gardens and those places. The segregation was rather thick. We pretty much had our own lifestyles but never any real racial conflicts from a personal perspective. Riding the back of the bus was accepted. Going in the back of restaurants to the restroom or whatever was accepted. We did not have a consciousness about that until we--'til Martin Luther King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came on the scene, quite frankly, and then my daddy [Robert Booker Flake], though he was fifth grade educated, was an avid reader. He read every--the newspaper from cover to cover every day, and my daddy was reading daily. He bought the Houston Chronicle and the Houston Post, the morning and the evening paper just to see what Martin Luther King was doing, and I think we developed a consciousness then about the fact that there was this segregation, and about that time in Studewood a young man was found hung from a tree with KKK [Ku Klux Klan] on his--carved into his stomach, and I think that was my first real sense of how dangerous this race issue was, and then the second experience for me was when I was working as a bus boy at Guido's [restaurant], and the owner's daughter asked one of my friends to dance for her or to dance with her, and of course, he was scared to death, and so when he didn't dance with her, she--and we were--it was before I was--we were setting up for the evening for dinner, and he was scared. He didn't do it, and he paid the price because she lied on him, and he lost his job. The third, I think, was when I went to work the next summer, my summer before going to college. I worked with my father in the tile factory, and to see those white kids coming home from college and in the summer supervising my father and these older men and calling them boys, and that's when I realized that I was going to college. I was gonna get my life together, and I was gonna do better, and from that point on, I thought I was really focused on doing it, went to college that first year in Ohio, first time I experienced snow, working nights, sleeping on my books. It was very difficult. Working in the cafeteria, I probably was doing an average of sixty hours a week with work just because I had to work to pay tuition and came home that summer, got a job at All-Right Parking [lot] between my freshman-sophomore year and then decided I wasn't going back to college because I was making $1.75 an hour, and I thought that was big, you know, and then I guess the Lord intervened because one day I'm trying to park a car. The brakes go out. I wind up in the front of a building across the street, and I say, you know, this is--I don't know that I can do this, but what really happened on the day that--somehow or another short-changed a patron without being knowledgeable of it. The rule was that if you--if a person said you did not give them proper change, but she left the lot and came back, if they said it and they were still on the lot, you gave them the difference, and you dealt with it later. If they left the lot and came back, you'd tell them we'd have to send it. The company would do the receipts at the end of the day and send it back, but she wouldn't accept that so she called the police who was on the corner, and in my eyes at that moment this was the biggest white man I had ever seen, and he said do you want him arrested, and for me, I had done nothing wrong, put me in the squad car, and of course the company lawyer was there just after they had booked me in, and that day I made a decision. I called the president of Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and asked are there any summer jobs? I'm ready to come back, and I went back, got my job back in the cafeteria, getting the school ready for opening for the summer, lifted the luggage of students coming in, helped get the dorms ready, did everything I could, but from that point on there was no question about it, but it was a segregated city, and it was--we stayed in our place. We went to the Lincoln Theater, which was the black theater, and all of the things that basically blacks could do were right there on Prairie in the block with the Lincoln Theater so we had a black hamburger stand, everything. You got your shoes shined. Everything you did, you did it right there in that block pretty much, and then you got on the bus. You got in the back, and you went back to your neighborhood. I'm amazed today because the Houston today is--and that's been substantiated by last month's 'Black Enterprise' [magazine]--the most integrated city in the country. You don't have those pockets, and when I started going back to Houston, I guess not in my college years, probably when I was living in Boston [Massachusetts], by the time they built the Galleria [shopping mall], and I was visiting my family out on 1960 [Farm Road 1960] and up in Missouri City [Texas] and places that I used to go merely to cut the lawns in front of those huge homes that white people owned, and I never thought, you know, the day would come when I would see my family members living in those - they actually lived for awhile before they moved out to where they are in most cases now, they actually lived in some of those homes that we thought these were rich people, and now they had moved in, and those people had moved out to places like Sugar Land [Texas] where I used to pick cotton, and as--and Humble [Texas] and places, you know, around Houston that have now grown, and now there's just a scattering of black people. That was not the case then. Story_ID: 7044 Speaker 1: Reverend Flake, are you a Southerner, you think, by temperament? I mean you've been in Baltimore [Maryland]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what does that mean for you? Speaker 2: I think if you call me a Southerner, I'd think it probably--I would consider myself to be more tolerant of a lot of things than I see Northerners, most Northerners, much more industrious on the whole. Percy Sutton [Founder, Inner City Broadcasting Corp.] and I often talk about the fact that--he's from San Antonio [Texas] - talk about the fact that in most--when you look at most successful blacks, even here in New York [New York], their roots are in the South. They grew up in that kind of environment where, although they were segregated, they worked within the construct of that community, and they were able to develop tools and skills that have led them to a place where, by that level of - you could call it workaholic mentality or whatever, they've been able to succeed so I think my basic temperament is very much rooted in my Southern upbringing. Story_ID: 7045 Speaker 1: And give me the schools that you went to. Speaker 2: I went to--my elementary school, I started at George Washington Carver Elementary. Mrs. Reed, who was the principal, allowed me to enter school. I was five years old, and my birthday came in at January 30th, and of course, she had the option of not allowing me in, but my mother [Rosalie Johnson Flake] took me there. It's an interesting thing. I remember Daddy [Robert Booker Flake] taking a day off to take me to school and try to get me enrolled in school. Mrs. Reed did a--Mrs. Reed, I guess it was an interview, and I was clearly somewhat advanced by her definition, and she let me enter, and so I started out at Carver Elementary, and then when we moved from my grandparents' [Garfield and Pearline Flake] house, we moved into a different school district. That was in the Aldine District [Houston, Texas]. We moved into the Klein District [Klein, Texas], and then I went to a school called Kohrville [Tomball, Texas], which came into this subdivision that we moved into, and it was a bus. Everybody in that area got on the bus. We went fourteen miles. We passed several white schools because along the way we picked up in two or three other communities, zig-zagging, picking up black kids, and they would, you know, come to a particular corner, and we picked them up, and then all the way down this fourteen miles off of what is what they call now Farm Road 249, which is right off of 1960 [Farm Road 1960], and we'd go past what is now 1960 which then was called Jackrabbit Road, and we'd go about five miles past that back into the country for school, four rooms, eight teachers, one of whom was principal and teacher, and they taught two grades each, and we were out in the country. I mean we played basketball on sand, and we made up games obviously, but that was the nature of how things were then, finished that school. Klein [school district] did not have a high school for blacks so what they did was had a relationship to the Aldine District so when we went to high school, then the bus picked us up and took us to the all black Carver High School [Houston, Texas] which initially was adjacent to the elementary, and then eventually they built a new one so three of--my brother, myself, two of my sisters, three of my sisters all graduated from Carver, and then Klein built a high school for blacks, and by the time I graduated from high school with new integration policies, my third sister--the Klein [District] schools integrated, and they went to the Klein High School [Klein, Texas] that was--they were first in an integrated class of students in that school. I left there and went to Wilberforce University in Ohio because I'd accepted the call to preach. Wilberforce is an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]-sponsored college, and it's an interesting story of how I got there because I was gonna go to Texas Southern [formerly Texas State University for Negroes, Houston, Texas] or Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College, Prairie View, Texas] where most of the people in my neighborhood went, and I went to preach at Wesley Chapel A.M.E. Church in the Third Ward [Houston, Texas] on Dowling. Reverend W. D. Williams had me preach for the Youth Sunday, and when I finished preaching, he said, "Are you going to college?" I said, "Well, I wanna go. I don't have money, but I'm gonna go. I'm gonna start either at Texas Southern or Prairie View," and he said, "I'm going out to Wilberforce, which is my alma mater, on Tuesday. I'm driving, and I want you to go with me. I'm going to enroll you in Wilberforce." Well, of course, he called my mother on the party line phone. That's what you had then. That's just an interjection, and he told her that "Your son has so much promise, and he doesn't need to go to a local college. There's a college that will help him to develop as a minister," and he drove me home that day from his church, and he talked to Mother for a long time, and Mother did not understand why he would have to go way up to Ohio. My mother, you know, this was just something she did not understand, but on Monday my mother took me--because I was mowing lawns that summer - my mother took me to Sears and Roebuck where she kept always an open account for September when we bought the new clothes--Sears Roebuck, Penney's, and Montgomery Wards [department stores]--and she bought me some clothes because I was gonna be gone from Tuesday till Sunday, and she bought me some new khaki pants and that kind of stuff so I rode up with Reverend Williams and a guy who was driving with him, and he took me to meet Bishop Hatcher and president Rembert Stokes, and he said I want him enrolled in school. He doesn't have any money. They gave me - the president had someone--had Dr. Williams meet with someone. They gave me a package of rents, rent and aid, work study, rent aid, and a student loan, National Defense Student Loan. Story_ID: 7046 Speaker 1: You had gone up for this trip. You were talking about. Speaker 2: Yeah, so the President gave me. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) What was the President's name again? Speaker 2: Rembert Stokes. Speaker 1: Okay, Rembert. Speaker 2: And Doctor Stokes gave me a job. My work assignment was in the cafeteria which was great because I mean I could either do that or clean up the dorms, but I preferred that, and I mean I went immediately to work, and worked so well that beyond the work study commitment I actually was hired to do the work, I mean, because I would go in - you couldn't get many students to get up at five in the morning to go and help fix breakfast, and the cooks loved it because I could cook. I could help them, and then I was pot washer. I was back server in lunch line, back in the evening serving. By the time I'd been working in the cafeteria about two or three years, I actually had the keys to the cafeteria because I was cleaning it up at night, whatever, and so it turned out to be a good experience for me. The first year was difficult. I was sick quite a bit only because working in the cafeteria you get wet and all, and then you go across the campus. I was used to Texas weather, no snow or anything, but I worked every day, I mean cold, whether I had a cold or whatever. You went to work, and that was just a part of my background, and then I stayed in that environment for two years and went to Payne [Theological] Seminary which is right there on the same campus, but by then--and I spent one year working. I spent one semester working full time in the cafeteria and made a lot of extra money which helped to pay my bill for the next semesters, and I stayed there until the end of my junior year when I took a year off and worked at the Horizon House in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] because Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] introduced the co-op [work-study] program so I was one of the first students to go out on co-op, and I liked the job in Philadelphia working with persons who had been in the mental hospital, Byberry [Philadelphia State Hospital for Mental Diseases] in eastern Pennsylvania, as a house father and counselor and really left that in part--I guess that's what changed my mind about going into the field of psychology. When I saw a young man who had OD'd [overdosed], and I had to go up that morning, and when I saw him, I was taking too much of the--was too empathetic to the patients, and so their burdens became my burdens, and I'm--as my supervisor used to say you're not Jesus. You can't solve all of their problems because I thought you could actually get these people well, and it was--I was not sleeping well. I was not resting well, and that event just kind of turned it around so then I went back, you know, and started getting--decided at nineteen [years old] that I was ready for marriage and got into a marriage and started working for--well, I left my social work job and started working for [R.J.] Reynolds Tobacco [Company] and followed that at Xerox [Corporation], and in both cases they would pay for business classes so I entered Wright State University [Dayton, Ohio] in the evenings. Several evenings a week I was at Wright State, either doing Xerox or Reynolds during the day, and then I had my little side business, which was selling Presto Pride Pots and some kind of stereophonic - it was a stereophonic system, you know, that you knock on people's doors, and you tell them they could have this system for $19.95 a month and that kind of thing, but I did that, you know, and then my former college dean, Carl Thomas, called me out of the blue one day and asked--said "I have a problem." He was the dean - he was then the Dean of Students at Lincoln in Pennsylvania [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], "and I'd like--I need somebody young and mature to come and work with me with these students. They've just gone in the president's [Herman Russell Branson, President, Lincoln University, 1970-1985] office and thrown their lunches on the president's walls, and I need help," and so I went out there, and he offered me the job of Associate Dean and Director of Student Activities, and it was a real interesting time because at that point I saw Xerox as my future, and suddenly here's a man that I revered and respected. I think I took - I must have taken probably four of my major classes in psychology from him, and I mean I looked up to him. He was both a preacher who pastored a church, and I went a lot of Sundays with him to his church before I got a church in that area, and then I also--he had a Ph.D. from Rutgers [Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey], and when he put on that red robe with all of those patches on it, I mean he was - this guy was tremendous. One year when I did have a shortfall in finances, he gave me a scholarship, the Jones Scholarship, which gave me enough money to be able to get into school so that with my work I'd be able to take care of the rest so he was like an image, I mean a real guy who was strong and tough so when he asked me to come to Lincoln, and I'd married, and my wife was in school at Wright State, and they offered to pay her tuition so I said well, this - you know, it's great, and they were gonna provide housing so it was a great opportunity to do it so we did that. Story_ID: 7047 Speaker 1: When my marriage started falling apart, I had to take a lot of blame because I think separating her from family and everything - we were too young. That was a difficult thing, and so I mean we talk periodically even now, and I tell her, "you know, it's not all her fault". It just couldn't be because to separate and go live in the country. Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] is in the country, and so you know, it's one of those things that you learn from your experiences, but--and then I was--I did a speech one day, and I think it was in Colorado. The University had sent me on one of those--I think we were doing--Student Affairs generally had conferences in various places, and a dean, one of the deans from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], heard me do a speech and asked me if I'd apply for the job as Director of Martin Luther King Center in Boston, and I--you know, the thought of going to the place where Martin King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been. I had, had the privilege of picking Martin King up at the airport. I drove the university car, too. I did everything. I ran the movies. I did it all, and the thought of going to the place where he had done his graduate work was just exciting so I then left Lincoln and took the job as Director of King Center. The next year the university chaplain died, and Dr. Silber [John Silber, President, Boston University, 1971-1996] asked me to take the chapel on an interim basis and set up a committee to find a chaplain, and then the Dean of Students got fired, and then he wanted me to be Dean of Students and interim dean of the chapel and supervise the King Center. I brought someone else in to run it, and so I did all three of those jobs essentially in my last year at Boston so it's still consistent with the kind of work ethic, and the President wanted me in the chapel because he said at 7:00 in the mornings when I'm on my way to my office, you're the only person I see on the sidewalk or the only person whose light I see on because I'm not a sleeper, you know. I get up, five, six hours I'm ready to roll, and so it's been a real good life. Story_ID: 7048 Speaker 1: Reverend Flake, I just have a couple questions because you attended one of our, you know, preeminent black institutions. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you were Dean at one of our preeminent, you know, black institutions, and I'm wondering--you know, when I thought--I wanna ask one question for clarification because I thought when the gentleman was taking you, you know, from Texas, was he taking you permanently? I thought it was for an interview. Speaker 2: He took me for an interview. It--. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) And then you ended up going. Speaker 2: I ended up going to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio]. Yeah, I came back home. That's to finish out the summer. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But this happened like in late May, and then I came back home, and I think between picking cotton and waiting tables or busing tables, that's what I did that summer, and then--but September, I was ready to go. I saved my money and bought some clothes and stuff for myself. Speaker 1: How would you say the Wilberforce experience shaped you? I mean you were--you had that rocky first year where you were like gone. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: How do you think that experience shaped you? Speaker 2: I think a tremendous contribution, and I realized it even more so by the time I took the job at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] and watched students going through the process of trying to be black versus students who - on Wilberforce campus and Lincoln campus [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] we were the student government. We were the newspaper. We were everything. I mean we defined what the institution was so there was not as much of a need to try to define ourselves as being black. Our strength was that we were developing skills for leadership, and I think every study that's been made indicated--and I don't know what these studies indicate now. When you looked at the Andy Youngs [Andrew Young, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations] and the leaders of America, the majority of them got at least their undergraduate training in these schools. Wilberforce was family so that even though it was adjustment for all us, most of us were from poor families, and so most of us worked. There were very few kids on campus who didn't work, and we identified with each other. We took care of each other. We looked out for each other. If you had five dollars, as many people as could eat on five dollars ate on that five dollars, you know. It was--I think and I still think as my two daughters have come out of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], and my son is down in Atlanta at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] now. There is still kind of a sense of family on those campuses, and I look at the kids that my son hangs with that come over from Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], and one of the reasons they hang with them is because they do their social life pretty much in that college complex with those students because they feel like on their own campuses they have to do it as an adjunct as opposed to being a total part of campus, and what I often say to young people--when my daughter said, my first daughter said "Daddy, I want to go to a black college," and the counselors over at her school told her "you don't want to do that," because my daughters have good grades, and she said "yes, that's what I want to do," because my children came eight grades in my school here and they went--all of them have gone to a white Catholic high school, and she said "that's what I want to do," and they went there, and they've done well. My second daughter graduated Miss Morehouse [beauty pageant at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa. I mean they feel because she could do everything that she was doing here, liturgical dance, all the stuff that defined her culturally, she could do it in that campus setting, and she would not have been able to do that in her belief system in a white campus. I think the black college still can take the rawest of material, and because kids are not caught up in a daily challenge of trying to define who they are racially, they can take that raw talent and produce some of the greatest and have produced some of the greatest leaders in this nation. Speaker 1: Did you come across [Reverend] Leon Sullivan when--I mean Sullivan during your time in Philadelphia that one? You said you did your, you know, your junior year there. Speaker 2: Yeah. At that time I did but did not understand the magnitude of what he represented. I probably best remember Leon Sullivan through my invitation of him to come to the University of Boston and from that--no, no, no, best remember him from working with Reverend U. A. Hugh in starting up the OIC [Opportunities Industrialization Centers of America, Inc., founded in Philadelphia in 1964] in Dayton, Ohio first but then did not get to know him until I invited him to come until I invited him to come and speak at Boston University. Story_ID: 7049 Speaker 1: Now the Boston [Massachusetts] experience, how did that influence you? I'm trying also to understand what is happening to you from a theological perspective with these people. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know, how are you growing and maturing? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Is it commonplace that people go and major in psychology if they wanna go into the ministry? Speaker 2: It is not necessarily commonplace, but I took all the religion courses, and just as I advise the young people here who enter the ministry, I always challenge them to create options, and my thesis even way back then was what if I'm an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]? My starting years in ministry will probably be in a very small church where some bishop sends me. Therefore I need to be able to do something else careerwise, and that's how I wound up, quite frankly, with [R.J.] Reynolds Tobacco [Company] and Xerox [Corporation]. As it turned out for me, my psychology training has been helpful in every field, whether business or in ministry, and when you think about it, in ministry among the requirements is getting what they call CEP [Counseling and Educational Psychology], which is really certification in counseling, so it has been very helpful to that regard. I think for me the Boston [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] experience was--before that, the Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] experience. I pastored a church in West Chester, Pennsylvania so for me from a theological perspective, no matter what else I have done, I have always been engaged in ministry so when I went to Boston and took over the King Center [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Center, Boston, University, Boston, Massachusetts], I actually initially started out as a member of St. Paul's Church [St. Paul African Methodist Episcopal Church] in Cambridge [Massachusetts] where [Reverend] John Bryant was then the pastor, but then I went to pastor in Newport, Rhode Island so I was actually commuting on weekends to Newport to pastor a church and gave that church up only when they made me interim chaplain, but even then I was the assistant pastor at Charles Street Church [Charles Street African Methodist Episcopal Church] over in Boston so my reality has always been that I have been in ministry in some fashion and expected to be, quite frankly, in ministry in a part-time category most of my life as I pursued a college presidency because once I got in education, I felt honestly that that was truly my calling until the bishop asked me to come here to New York. Little did I realize that I would be able to in this environment combine the complete package of training and skills and job experiences so from a marketing perspective, from the perspective of education, having been a college dean, to come here and then build the school. Ministry for me is what we generally call evangelizing, which is marketing, and all of the skills that I developed over both from a business, education perspective, this is one place where I have always said I could take the complete package of those gifts and use them, and they've been used very effectively in trying to build this institution to what it has become. Speaker 1: Now you were in Boston from. Speaker 2: '73 [1973] to '76 [1976]. I came the summer of '73 [1973] and left in August--I came here the first Sunday, September '76 [1976]. Story_ID: 7050 Speaker 1: And was this something that you wanted or it just happened, you know, as it happens if people--in different places, but you were also--what made you interested? That's what I'm trying say. Speaker 2: Well, yeah. If you look at my career track, it is the most interesting thing. When I look back now and I see what happened to my life, I received an invitation to come and work at Lincoln [University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. I received an invitation to come to work at Xerox [Corporation] actually. I was doing set-ups in a grocery store for [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company]--you know when--and I don't know. I haven't even paid attention of late, but back in the old days the Camel, Winston, Salem [cigarette brands] rack was the rack you saw in the store, I mean, so I was doing set-ups in an opening grocery store when a Xerox rep [representative] happened to come in the store and asked if I'd be interested in working for Xerox. Dean Thomas [Carl A. Thomas] invited me to come to Lincoln. Steve Trachtenberg invited me to come to Boston [University], and the bishop invited me to come to New York, and then the people invited me to run for [United States] Congress. In every instance these were not things that were on my radar, and so you know, I think God has just created openings in places that I probably would not have gone, but as it turns out in the end, God then sent me to this place where all of those places where I understood the value of having gone to all those places and being able to use those experiences to build Allen Cathedral [The Greater Allen Cathedral, Jamaica, New York] into what it is. Speaker 1: But what made you interested, though? That doesn't answer--I mean. Speaker 2: I guess what. Speaker 1: Because you're saying at the same time you were thinking that you want to be a college president, and this was not apparent on the face that that's what this was so what made you--did you want to get out of Boston [Massachusetts]? Speaker 2: No. No. It was not a matter of getting out of Boston. It was--as a matter of fact, I was offered a congregation at Durham, North Carolina, and was offered a congregation in New York. What made me interested in coming here was my wife [Reverend Margaret Elaine McCollins Flake] and I realized that the kind of churches we were being offered were not the kind of churches that I thought I'd be offered. These were actually quality churches out of which bishops had been elected in every instance. When the invitation came to come here, my wife and I actually went into a three-day fasting and prayer about what is the Lord saying to me now because this is one summer within one month in which I've had three invitations to come to a major church where a bishop was elected at the General Conference that July, and we realized that - when she said to me "Floyd, you don't recognize it, but the glow that is on you when you're doing ministry is different than when you're doing anything else, and I think maybe the Lord is telling us it's time to pursue full-time ministry, and you've turned down two good churches. I don't think you should turn down this," and I said "but you said you never wanted to live in New York, and you know I don't ever want to go to New York," and she said "I know I said that, but I think the Lord is sending us to New York," and she was seven months pregnant, and no, I didn't want to leave Boston. Quite frankly, I told the other two bishops that I couldn't leave because I'd just been appointed Dean of Students, and I wanted to spend another year working in the university setting. I had applied for and Dr. Silber [John Silber, President, Boston University, 1971-1996] had pretty much gotten approval for me to go into that executive education training program at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and I had to leave that and not do it that summer, and of course, I've never done it now because that's one of the things one does when one is thinking about college presidency, and so what the president did was said "okay, I don't want to lose you." He gave me an adjunct professorship at the seminary to teach church administration, kept my job open, and said "you can have this job back if it doesn't work out since you've never pastored full-time." I come to New York. The first Sunday I preach, about twenty people join the church, and for my first few Sundays here we were probably averaging anywhere between twenty and thirty new members, and I said this is where the Lord wants me to be, and you know, we shaped a vision for what this ministry could be. I talked to the officers and members about my visions in education and the fact that I'd gotten students at Lincoln and Boston coming from public settings that were not--did not have the kind of skills I thought they should have, and I felt that we oughta build a school, and if we could get kids from first through eighth grade or kindergarten through eighth, that we'd be able to make a great contribution to education. They shared that vision, and suddenly we were in a position. I met my congressman, and he came to meet me on the day they had the big event to welcome the new pastor. We talked about the 202 housing program [Housing and Urban Development housing assistance for the Elderly], and the next week I'm in Washington [D.C.] negotiating for senior citizens housing, and that came online quick because the Secretary had some discretionary units. This congressman wanted to see those units come to this community, and so we started building them, raising money for a school. The church is growing fast. It was happening so fast that I never looked back at going back to Boston. I called Dr. Silber one day and asked him if we could meet, and I went up to Boston to get my things and told him I really couldn't honor my commitment to teach because really I'd gotten involved and engaged in this ministry in a way that I could not be true to this job and that I wanted him to relieve me from it, and he actually kept me on salary for six months because he wanted me to make sure that I was comfortable and this wasn't just a honeymoon and that, you know, that it would end and I would have nowhere to go so as it turned out, it's just grown from that. Story_ID: 7051 Speaker 1: The church was what size when you first started? Speaker 2: We had actually a roll membership of about 1,200 so there was an active membership of about 800, a good solid church [Greater Allen Cathedral, Jamaica, New York]. Speaker 1: And. Speaker 2: And that was considered back then a big church. Speaker 1: It's true. That's true. Speaker 2: That was back in the '70s [1970s]. This was a big church. Speaker 1: That is true. Yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And the community, was it the same as it is now or has the community changed? Speaker 2: The community has changed tremendously. The demographics of this community then was the upward mobile community of persons who'd moved from Harlem [New York] to Bronx [New York] and Brooklyn [New York], they came here. I mean if you could get a home here in St. Albans [New York], you were considered almost creme de la creme. Problem was the social problems that came with this--that emerged in the community meant that the persons were not getting what they expected for any middle-class community, and so you saw the commercial strips begin to deteriorate. The drug problem started to develop. Up until about '84 [1984] the stories about the community was a community with such great promise in decline. Interestingly enough, I think if you talk to almost any of the leadership of the community, they would suggest that our starting the building of that senior citizens and then at the same time right after that starting the building of that school, and both places very depressed pieces of property, in many ways made a lot of people start thinking differently about the community, and then as we started buying more, changing community, people around here, especially in this St. Albans (unclear) Park, began to say I'm not moving to the county, and so it put us in a position to begin to try to change the face of the community, and as we then--by '85 [1985] we were building homes, and you know, so there was a different sense about the community, was able to influence the police department to put what they were then calling their TNT [Tactical Narcotics Teams] unit in here and deal with driving some of this drug trade out of the community, making it more comfortable for people to live here, and by '86 [1986] I was elected to [United States] Congress, and the response of the city and people to this community became overwhelming so we began to build new kind of bases of power, and the community response has been phenomenal enough that it's almost a new community now, so much so, the supermarket, the Home Depot [U.S.A., Inc.] None of that would have come in here before '84 [1984], '85 [1985]. Speaker 1: Now you got married again, though. Speaker 2: I got married again in--we just celebrated twenty-five years in December so I got married in '78 [1978]. Speaker 1: Okay, '78 [1978]. Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Speaker 1: So the wife you spoke of coming here was - that was your first wife then. Speaker 2: My first wife was with me at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: At Lincoln. Okay. Speaker 2: We divorced at Lincoln. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And then I married Elaine [Reverend Margaret Elaine McCollins Flake] when we were in Boston [Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: So I met her at St. Paul's Church [St. Paul African Methodist Episcopal Church, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and then we got married. Story_ID: 7052 Speaker 1: So now who was the congressman--? Speaker 2: Joe Addabbo [Joseph P. Addabbo, U.S. House of Representatives, New York, 1961-1986]. Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Because you talk--. Speaker 2: He was - twenty-six years he was congressman. The community transitioned under him from a predominantly white community to in '82 [1982] the census data of '80 [1980] indicated that it had now become a predominantly African American community. However, Joe was good. He was the kind of congressman who was there for everybody. Constituent service was top notch, and so even though blacks ran against him between '80 [1980] and '85 [1985] and '82 [1982] and '84 [1984], most of us stuck with Joe because he was also the committee chair, which is seniority and power, of the Armed Services Appropriations Committee. Now if you understand how that Appropriations Committee work, it doesn't matter which committee you chair, though we didn't have defense here, but he could get anything he wanted for the district, and in '85 [1985] when he died is when--in '86 [1986] when he died is when they asked me if I would run, and so I did not ever want to be a politician in an elective sense, but the people said "We don't care--you know--who else runs," judges, state assemblymen, state senator. They all ran, but the people said "We see the houses. We see the school. We see all the work you're doing in the community." Story_ID: 7053 Speaker 1: So, okay, well let's go to--so you got recruited to run for [United States] Congress. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Basically, and it was because you really came in here--I want to understand, though, did you have any experience politically--you--like in Boston [Massachusetts]? No? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You didn't? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: You weren't really engaging in any political action. Speaker 2: No. My - well, I wouldn't say political. I wasn't engaged because obviously as the church [Greater Allen Cathedral, Jamaica, New York] grew, no politician in this area would not engage in some way. My engagement with politics was quite different from a traditional engagement in that what I did was try to do a needs analysis on what services this community needed and what services the people here needed so that I developed relationships, for instance, with Ed Koch [Mayor, New York City, New York], who was then the mayor who I had not supported. I actually supported Percy Sutton [Founder, Inner City Broadcasting Corp.], but I developed a relationship because I called up the mayor's office one day and said "Mr. Mayor, I did not support you, but I want to talk to you about housing. In your campaign you talked about building affordable housing", and I went down and met with the mayor, and the mayor said "Your community is ripe for building affordable housing, and since you've been engaged--" and as I said earlier, since I'd engaged my congressman so that--and we wound up building the senior citizens, he said, "Since you already have an organization in place, you need to get involved in public--in affordable housing." Well, that turned out to be a blessing because he gave us those scattered sites, city sites, and by this time, I developed a good relationship with him. We wind up with home care services. We wound up with the multi-service center over there which we do basically everything from psychiatric services to a walk-in day clinic and all of that, and all those things negotiated basically directly with the mayor's office, and so I think--so from my perspective, politics was about not running for an office but getting the resources back into the community, and so, no, I had no real political experience, but people felt that because I could do that that I should be doing that on a much larger scale for the community as a whole, and it turned out I was able to do it because I never became a real politician. I saw it as the business of politics for me was getting those federal buildings into this district and getting resources back in the district, and all the newspapers were reporting that this guy brings more resources into New York than anybody else, and that's because I did not stay in Washington [D.C.] for the receptions. I did not go and hang out at the parties. I came home every day, and I took care of my district. Speaker 1: You know, and that's even amazing, I mean the fact that you--I mean New York is closer to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But still even with that, that's a pretty horrendous schedule. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, you know, there were several factors. One, I had the church, and I wanted to be here Wednesday nights to do my own Bible study. Two, I had the family or that's number one, and Elaine [Reverend Margaret Elaine McCollins Flake] was running the school. Our kids were in the school, and to relocate my family to Washington would have been at a high cost because you cannot live in Washington, D.C., and send your kids to Washington, D.C. public schools so it would have cost me much more than sending--having Elaine here working so we made a decision, and it was clear that if there was going to be a commuter, it would be me, and I was here every Sunday, and the people here were happy because the church was still growing, and none of the services of the church diminished, and that was the critical piece is this is where my heart is. This is where my commitment is, and when I ran, I said I will go to Congress, but I will--this will be for a season. I will be there ten or twelve years, and at the end of the eleventh year I left so that's about as close to the promise as you can come. Story_ID: 7054 Speaker 1: When they first recruited you [U.S. House of Representatives, New York, 1987-1998], did you think you had a chance of winning? Speaker 2: Truthfully, no, because remember I was not recruited by the political party. The political party had its own candidates, the judge, the state senator and those two assembly people. I was recruited by the people. I mean the people, the clergy said, "You have to run," and quite frankly, the clergy did a press conference and announced that I was running even before I consented to run. And my wife [Reverend Margaret Elaine McCollins Flake] didn't want me to run, so in the end I really kind of got nudged into it, and I'll give you a funny story, a little anecdote. I'd come in. My wife and I are struggling with this whole thing and politics, and do I really want to go to Congress so one Saturday night she's up, she's crying. I said, "You know, forget about it. I don't need to be a congressman. I'm happy with the work I'm doing in the church [Greater Allen Cathedral, Jamaica, New York]." I come to church at eight o'clock [A.M.]. Then we were having two services. I get up in the 8:00 [A.M.] service, and I announce that I am withdrawing, and I've done petitions now, but I've not turned the petitions in. "I'm withdrawing as a candidate for [United States] Congress effective immediately." I come out of church at eight [o'clock]. My wife is at the office and she's boo-hooing, and I'm saying, "What's the matter?" She said "How could you withdraw?" I said, "Because you don't want me to be in Congress. I don't have to do this so I've just decided that in the best interest of the family, I'm not gonna do it." She said "You have to run." I said, "What do you mean I have to run?" "You're not going to spend the rest of your life blaming me because you wanted to go to Congress, and you'll be saying I didn't let you do it," so I get up at 11:00 [A.M.], and I announce that I am now back in the race for Congress, okay, so the next day the paper writes the story 'Flake Flip-Flops,' and it was a funny thing, you know, and I said "Okay, well, I'm going to stay in it." I'll run the campaign, and I don't expect to win, and you know, it'll be over so we run a campaign. I go to bed on the night of the election thinking I've won, and then I suddenly discovered that the party did not put my name on absentee ballots so that now I want to be Congressman because I've been cheated, and so my wife is now ready to do war because her husband has been cheated, you know, because they sent out ballots without my name on it so we carry on this prostrated legal battle to get me seated as congressman because they had illegally sent absentees without my name, and we continued that battle--oh, the election was June 10th. The primary for the actual seat, because this was a three-month period to fill the vacated seat of the congressman who died [Joe Addabbo], and that was a special election so this primary is gonna to be in September. We keep him in court until August, and in August we decide--we've already decided now we're going to run in this primary, people all over saying, "They cheated Reverend Flake. We're not going to--next time we're gonna turn out." They turned out the next time, and I win like sixty percent of the vote, and so he got to sit in Congress for a grand total of about a month because we had kept him in court all of that time, but no, I didn't really think you can run for Congress and not be a politician, and this is your first foray into politics, and you actually win, but you know, I'm telling you God has had His hand on me (laughs) throughout my life so it's been good. Speaker 1: (Unclear). Story_ID: 7055 Speaker 1: What was that experience like? What was the whole--because this is totally different. I mean one thing about having your church, you almost have your own kingdom. Speaker 2: Well--your own base. Speaker 1: No, but really I meant--okay, but. Speaker 2: With this kind of church, you're right. Speaker 1: You're right--I mean--and then I'm saying at the time you came in the community, and you were able to do so many different things. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I mean so, you know, one could say you had the skill sets and everything. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: But I'm saying there it's a whole different ball of wax. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. Speaker 1: So I'm wondering how you found that experience. Speaker 2: I found [United States] Congress [U.S. House of Representatives, New York]--because I went with a mind set. My campaign was about economic development. My primary objective will be to bring those resources and build from the model that I have, and so I went there with that attitude. I did not seek any congressional positions which means that I didn't expect to become a part of the leadership of the Congress because, one, it would have required me to spend more time there in the evenings than I wanted to, and two, I thought that it would in some way keep me from fulfilling my responsibilities as pastor, and I did not want that so I was clear that I was going to go in the mornings and come home in the evenings so with that attitude I was able to focus exclusively on how do I get jobs into this community? Where are the resources to do what my colleagues in the South are doing, and that is bringing federal buildings into their district? That's what I focused on and developing relationships across Democratic [Party] and Republican [Party] lines so the events I went to generally were not--I went to my partisan Democratic things, but I also went to those things that were bi-partisan so that I could get to know Republicans because I knew that my kind of agenda would require some of their involvement to make it happen, and so for me it was frustrating to a degree because most Democrats did not understand what I was talking about in terms of economic development. They understood the social-political paradigm. They did not understand the education-economic paradigm, and so I was kind of caught betwixt and between because my Republican colleagues understood the education-economic paradigm as well as the social-political paradigm so I was constantly trying to walk that tightrope trying to find my ground somewhere in the moderate middle, and sometimes in the moderate middle is a place where you can get killed if you're not careful and essentially got killed in terms of if I had had any ambitions to be a leader in the Democratic Party. I would never have been that anyway because I had learned how to negotiate both sides, frustrated because I am hands-on. I get things done, and I get them done relatively quickly. In Congress you do not get things done quickly. A classic example, I served on the Housing Subcommittee of the Banking Committee. Part of our responsibility obviously is the passing of housing legislation. I went to Congress at the height of the homeless crisis. My colleagues went out one night, moved the homeless people off the grates, and actually took the grates themselves, and got their pictures in the paper in the light, and said that we need to solve the homeless problem. We need legislation to solve the problem, and I don't know whether you know about the McKinney Act [renamed the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act]. McKinney [Stewart B. McKinney, U.S. House of Representatives, Connecticut] was a member of the House with me on the Banking Committee and had postured a bill for homelessness. Two years after I'm in Congress and after they had moved the homeless from the grates, still no Homeless Bill. My third year in Congress, McKinney dies. He was a Congressman from Connecticut, and then we do a Homeless Bill when the homeless crisis has now began to ebb, you know. When it was at its height, we did nothing but talk about it, and as it began to reach its lower point, then we talk about doing it. Then we actually put a bill together, and it's that kind of frustration. It's the kind of frustration of not being able to make things happen in response to needs in a relatively quick fashion as opposed to here. You know, I saw senior citizens needed housing, and we built it. I saw students needing education. We built a school. I saw seniors needing to be able to stay in their homes and have home care service, and I found a service, actually walking into 250 Broadway [office of Mayor Ed Koch, New York City, New York] and saying to them I'd like to know how to get an RFP [Request for Proposals] or will you be issuing a RFP, and they said we will, but you don't have to do an RFP because we're looking for a sponsor in Queens [New York], I mean that kind of thing, and you get it done so as I said, this ministry is about identifying needs and responding. Congress will identify needs, but they don't respond generally quick enough. They did the other day fortunately with the events here, but that's not the usual custom, but I knew again when I went that I was not going to be there more than twelve years under any circumstances, and so for me to endure the frustration for the good that I was doing for the district because once I knew they were going to try to build a new FAA [Federal Aviation Administration building] and that Long Island [New York] wanted it, I knew I had to compete to get it, and once I knew they were gonna build a new FDA [Food and Drug Administration building] and Brooklyn [New York] wanted it, I knew I had to compete, and what I did was found that politicians functioned like politicians. My Chief of Staff was Edwin Reed, who is my Chief Financial Officer here [at Greater Allen Cathedral, Jamaica, New York] now, Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] MBA [Masters of Business Administration], and I looked through to see how this process was going to develop, and we found a way to put one little paragraph in a piece of legislation and wound up with the federal drug [Food and Drug Administration] building and one little paragraph in another piece of legislation and wound up with the FAA building, and that's how, you know, we made it work so each of those generated jobs. Each of those were hundred million dollar buildings which changed the aesthetics in the parts of the community we put the buildings, and that's what it's about because that builds into what I do in the church so for me, I saw it as an extension of the role and brought more resources to be able to do what we did not have the resources to do, and you compound that with about a hundred million dollars of--well, when we finish the next project, close to a hundred million dollars that we're directly responsible for building. It means that now that you ask what this community was like, those people who would have left don't leave because now their property values are going up, and the same things that they would get in the county, they know now they can get right here in the city and pay less taxes for it. Story_ID: 7056 Speaker 1: This is still a very interesting story because what I'm saying is that people necessarily could not make that transition or even balance. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That has a lot to do with your, you know, the training you got from your father [Robert Booker Flake] working those three jobs and the way that you had handled your life, but did you take a lot of criticism, though, once you became - were you - your constituency stayed pretty rock solid, right? Speaker 2: Absolutely. Speaker 1: But was there other criticism of you and how you were balanced and--. Speaker 2: Absolutely. I mean--well, remember for the first--in the first place when you defeat the political Peter Principle process, then you're automatically in the line of fire because you have to understand that the negotiations they made with me in trying to keep me from running for [United States] Congress [U.S. House of Representatives, New York] was if you let the Senator go to Congress and the Assemblyman go to the Senate, we will give you a free ride to run for the [New York State General] Assembly seat, and you can go to Albany [New York] since you've never been in politics before, okay? My response was "I'm not a politician, but one thing I'm certain about is if I have to make the choice of going to Albany or Washington [D.C.], I go to Washington, and I'll just take my chances running. If I lose, I lose. If I win, I win, but it's not life or death for me." They had pretty much decided who should be in those seats, and essentially my winning blocked the advent of those who really control or thought they controlled the political process so it threw things out of kilter. A lot of what drove my trial, the trial that I had had to do with that whole election. Remember that the investigation by the [United States] Justice Department--I went into Congress in January '87 [1987]. My investigation started September '87 [1987], and that investigation started with the person that I defeated [Alton R. Waldon, Jr.], who was the [New York] State Senator who was supposed to go to Congress who was appointed to the [New York] State Investigation Commission to investigate politicians who hired one of the persons who was an officer in this church [Greater Allen Cathedral, Jamaica, New York] as a prime investigator and which I did not know, of course, until the trial so yes, I mean I paid a price for winning, but in the end I think the people were better served, and the community is better off, and I consider the price that I paid to have been one of my best experiences because what I learned in '87 [1987] through '91 [1991] during the investigation period and the trial itself helped me to become even more focused. For the first time in nineteen--once I knew I was under investigation, I actually went back to writing manuscripts. Even though I break from manuscript preaching, I don't read word for word. I actually focus even more deeply on my ministry, deeply on my family because we were pushed together. We had bomb threats. Some of my children were being taken to ball games and dance rehearsals in police cars, and it made me focus so much on family that I mean I think most of my family members would say I've been a good father and good husband, but I mean I was really into it, and as I tell people, I did not make mistakes in Washington that I'd probably could've easily made. What's happening to Gary Condit [U.S. House of Representatives, California] can happen to any congressman because the aggressive nature of people in that environment. No congressman has to ask for anything. It's there, and I have been aggressively pursued, but going through that trial early in my congressional career made me not go to places or even be in an environment where temptation would have a possibility of overtaking me, and a part of that rationale for coming home every night had to do with creating a good clean image and a wholesome sense of who I was to people, and after awhile the aggressive persons in Washington who have taken down many a congressman just did not approach me because they knew that that was not why I was there so for all of the pain of the trial, the ultimate gain from it has been extremely beneficial in terms of my ability to still have an appreciation for the necessity of having people around me but also having my wife's [Reverend Margaret Elaine McCollins Flake] cautiousness about levels of trust, and that has been a good thing in terms of helping me to become what I consider to be a better person because now I try to be much more judicious in the choices of people that I circle myself with, knowing that as you develop other people and even if they are growing, they can have negative reactions to your growth because it is not uncommon for them to think that they ought be in the place where you are, even though you were a prime instrument in helping to bring them along so I've learned a lot. I've learned a lot. Speaker 1: And the powers that be didn't really totally infiltrate your church home [Greater Allen Cathedral, Jamaica, New York] to the point that it, you know, caused a lot of friction. Speaker 2: They infiltrated in the places where it counted most. This guy who became a principle investigator [Alton R. Waldon, Jr.] was one of the three key officers, and they infiltrated with my Executive Assistant, and the four of them are the people who wound up testifying against me. The majority of the church stood with me, and we were gaining membership all during the trial period. All during the stories in the newspaper people were coming here to find out what this was about. The trial itself, two of the jurors came and joined the church because they said they had never ever imagined a church functioning like this, and so the growth of this ministry was frightening to some who were even in key leadership roles, but it was not to the majority of the members, and so we had some of our greatest growth spurts during that period. Story_ID: 7057 Speaker 1: Do you have any--I want to talk about the [United States Congressional] Black Caucus--Not just the Black Caucus. Did you find that you got pressure from, you know, the black members of the [United States] Congress because they didn't really understand you or was it the Democratic [Party] machine that didn't understand you? Speaker 2: Democratic machine pretty much controls the majority of the members in the Black Caucus so I think it's a combination of both. An example, on education choice, I've been a strong proponent of choice. The Caucus has always considered me to be strange in terms of my position. My position emerged as, one, because I've been a dean in higher education, and I've seen those young people come without the necessary skills, two, because I built a school in a community where the performance surrounding it is low while the performance in my school is high, and I don't test kids in. I don't do anything differently in terms of the intake than the public schools do except parents have to pay tuition, and so my thesis was with the Caucus your communities are the ones who are most severely impacted by the lack of a delivery of a quality product in education by the public system. Therefore if that system is not going to deliver and you're not going to challenge that system, it means more and more of your kids going to jails, more and more of your kids who are not going to be able to compete, and we can't just sit in a room and call ourselves a caucus and merely react. We have to have some pro-active positions, and whether we embrace the idea of choice or not, our reality has to be one of dealing with the fact that these are our kids who are most impacted, and yes, I mean they allowed me and Major [Robert Odell] Owens [U.S. House of Representatives, New York] to have a debate, and I did my analysis and found that no member of the Black Caucus had sent their kids to public schools. I came to look at their districts, and every one of their districts was the lowest performing of the other congressmen in their state, and I challenged them on it, yes, positions like that. I had--I guess the other position was on a partial birth abortion. I reconciled the question of abortion because I grew up, and at thirteen I saw Jean Marie Weaver's face puffed and purple because some back room back--her mama took her somewhere to have an abortion, and I reconciled to the reality that there are young girls in those kind of situations where rape, incest, abuse, and things causes one to have to deal with the question of abortion, but if you get into an abortion at a seven-month fetus that's life. I'm a seven-month child, and so me and the Caucus went round and round on the issue until I told them look, this is a conscience decision. It has nothing to do with my politics. This is a reality that I cannot conceive of someone being seven months in somebody's womb and that not being life, and I just can't support this, and then they left me alone, but yeah, I had my struggles, but I've stood my ground because of what I believe in, and they--one thing most Black Caucus members will say about me is, "We respect him," because I don't speak a lot, and as [William] Bill Clay [U.S. House of Representatives, Missouri] says, "When Floyd speaks, we should listen because whether we agree or not, he's not out here just throwing bombs and just speaking out of school." Story_ID: 7058 Speaker 1: Do you see a value in the [United Congressional] Black Caucus or were you sort of on the side? Do you see a value in it? Speaker 2: I was in it. I was in it. I see a value in it. I think their value, though, is probably more educational. If they would not be so reactionary, they could educate people to the reality of government's strengths and weaknesses, but their survival is tied into--so much of what they are is tied into the party apparatus that they're not as effective as they could be in doing that. Individual members can be much more effective than as a collective, but I think it is important to have the collective because they do some good things. I mean the scholarship program is phenomenal. That weekend, the actual forums to speak on the various areas of issues in which Caucus members are involved are very critical and important, but I think where you fall apart is if you only isolate yourself in the corner and you only isolate yourself by party when you're already a minority and don't deal with the fact that there is another party on the other side. My legislation for community development institutions passed because I got Republican [Party] votes first, and then some Democrats [political party] were embarrassed not to come on board with it. Well, now that has become one of the biggest programs in the federal government, but my friends in the Caucus for the most part when I initially proposed it, because my fellow sponsor was a guy named [Thomas] Tom Ridge who's now the governor of Pennsylvania who's a Republican [formerly U.S. House of Representatives, Pennsylvania], was you and all of this economic and business stuff. You know, that ain't what black people are about. Well, the reality is that is what they are about, and if we would just--if the Caucus could focus on that reality as opposed to this old social-political paradigm, they would be a very powerful instrument. Speaker 1: Now, you know, that there's that picture out of you, out there where they say--it's the 'Village Voice' [newspaper] cover story. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Where they say, "Are the right-wing, you know, about to take over," or something like that. They'd love to take over--. Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right, right, right, right, right. Speaker 1: And I'm just--what are your view of--I mean this--the whole thing. You're mainly more of an independent. Speaker 2: Very much so. Very much so. I take--. Speaker 1: Would you call yourself more--more moderate right-wing? I mean that's what. Speaker 2: No. No. I'm probably moderate center. I take the best of what both parties have to offer so that from an educational and initiative perspective I tend to think that the Republicans [political party] have offered more in terms of providing choices. I don't think vouchers are the answer. I think vouchers are a good hammer to be able to have a pulpit on which to raise the questions of the lack of quality education in these schools. I do think charter schools are positive, and those are things that Democrats have traditionally not supported. I do think that some changes in the way the funding cycle is in public education has to be addressed, and that's not things Democrats traditionally want to see. Democrats traditionally talk about class size, more teachers, more salaries, and I agree with those things, and building new buildings, but if you get all of that and expectations are still low and children are still not able to come out of school and be competitive, then you still have not solved the problem, and so my issue becomes I take that off of that shelf, but then I come back on this shelf because I'm a firm supporter of affirmative action, and I believe that because others have had opportunities to develop generational wealth, it would be foolish to abandon affirmative action now when persons like myself are the first in our family to graduate from college, and the laws are not--it is not about slavery. It's really about the laws that superceded slavery that kept generations of people from being able to participate fully in this American economy other than as contributors to the benefit of other people so that my right-wing friends will never embrace that. You know--but my Democratic friends embrace that so, you know, I pick and choose those things which I think are central to trying to get to a place where we can do the best job for the most people, knowing that we cannot do everything for everybody. Story_ID: 7059 Speaker 1: What are you most proud of that you accomplished while you were there? Speaker 2: Oh, I think the proudest thing that I accomplished [while in the United States Congress] was getting those two federal buildings [Food and Drug Administration and Federal Aviation Administration buildings] in this district and getting the Bank Enterprise [Award Program] Community Development Financial Institutions [Fund] law passed [in 1994] because that has generated that millions and millions of dollars into these under-served communities, and it has allowed for community reinvestment to become a much more viable tool for home building and commercial development than we've ever had in the past. Speaker 1: And who was instrumental in helping you with that, you know, with the legislation? Were there any of your colleagues that you would say was instrumental in that? Speaker 2: I think my most instrumental colleague was probably [Thomas] Tom Ridge [Governor of Pennsylvania], and that's because Tom came here to Jamaica [New York] to see what this community was like, and I went to Erie [Pennsylvania] to see what his community was like. Erie is a former steel town. Steel mills are closed up, same problems in that community as were here, and I was chairing the committee. He was my ranking member. He made the commitment to want to do something positive. I made that commitment, and so when we put that bill together, it was clear that it could embrace the needs of either community. Republican [Party], Democratic [Party], black, white, it should not have been an issue except for the Democrats [political party] it became an issue in large measure because it was not the usual get-a-piece-of-the-action kind of program that Democrats understand. This was really about - in their opinion, they said it was empowering banks to do what they ought to be doing anyway so if they were not doing it, why not empower them by reducing the Federal Deposit Insurance so that they would feel as if they were getting the carrot as well as the stick. That was our objective, and it has worked extremely well since then so I'm proud of those things, I think, and I think without Tom bringing the Republicans [political party] along, the bill would never have passed so it was key that we worked together on it. Speaker 1: And was it '97 [1997] that you left the [United States] Congress? Speaker 2: December '97 [1997]. Speaker 1: And you - was it - I know you said okay, I only intended to stay for a season, but did it just get too much or did you just say, you know, enough is enough because? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Huh? Speaker 2: What really happened, in my last - from '94 [1994] to '97 [1997] we began to dig the ground to build this cathedral [Greater Allen Cathedral, Jamaica, New York]. By '96 [1996] we were probably one-third of the way up. We still had not gotten financing. I had released Edwin [Rev. Edwin Reed, Chief Financial Officer] to come here and manage the building process and especially the financing because we had to work through the banks. He got that done in a snap because he's a former investment banker and commercial banker, and I needed somebody on the grounds doing it, but I also realized that if this congregation had enough faith in me that they were prepared now to take a leap to take upon themselves $170,000 a month mortgage, and although we were packed for 6:30, 8:30, 11:15 [A.M. church service] in that gym, it only seated 1200 people. My heart really kind of was into this. My heart was no longer there [in Congress]. I got to a place where it was drudgery getting up, catching the plane, flying to Washington [D.C.] because I wanted to be here on top of this project, and I wanted to make sure that from the very moment the door opened that the people did not have to be concerned about whether or not Pastor is going to be here to make sure that we can handle this mortgage and that we can grow, and that's what - my heart was into putting together programs, the vision for what this could become. What are we going to do now? We have 2500 seats. Are we going to fill them right away? Do we go to two services? Do we keep three services? Everything about what I was doing while I was on the plane on the way to Washington was about this. Everything I was doing, the minute I got off of that plane, before I went home I was here, and so that became so predominant in my thinking that there was really no need for me to be there any longer. The thing that kept me there was two things. One, I had not done final closure on the Federal Aviation Administration Building so that got done in my last year, and two, President [William J. "Bill"] Clinton called me and asked me, after I had gone to him and said this is going to be my last year, if I would stay long enough because I was one Democratic vote he could count on for trade legislation, and so I'm one of the few Democrats, the only [Congressional] Black Caucus member, to vote for NAFTA [North American Free Trade Agreement] and the only Black Caucus member that supported trade because I have the largest trading airport in the country so I had to vote the interest of [John F.] Kennedy [International] Airport [New York City, New York] and its maintenance, which meant defying the Democratic Party. Story_ID: 7060 Speaker 1: So now how has it been since you've been back then? Speaker 2: Oh, it's been lovely. This has been--oh, God, well beyond any vision that I could have had. I mean I was really prayerful about getting rid of the 6:30 [A.M.] service [at Greater Allen Cathedral, Jamaica, New York]. Now the first floor is full. That's about close to 1000 people or more. 8:30 [A.M.] is 2500 seats, and we put chairs out. 11:15 [A.M.] is full here and full over there where the kids are, and that's 600 - 5 [500], 600 kids. It has been phenomenal. Tithing has been so phenomenal that we generally raise enough on the first Sunday alone to take care of the mortgage, and we have money left. The rest of the month the money goes into the ministries, and we've been able to go from the two--myself, my wife [Reverend Margaret Elaine McCollins Flake], and one assistant pastor. I have eight full-time pastors on staff, including myself, so it's been phenomenal. It's growing so fast. Just keeping up with it, you know, from a staff function has just been the most difficult problem because my financial office has grown from two people. I think there are fourteen people in there now so it's because we've had to break it down in a traditional corporate sense with human resources, breaking down personnel, pensions, insurance, I mean every category you find in a major corporation. We had to bring in people to do that so I'm enjoying it, and then because I am also doing the Edison [Edison Schools, New York, New York] piece it's, you know, it's a perfect fit for me because my educational background works well there. My agreement with Edison is not a full-time commitment, and I'm doing what I love. I'm traveling around the nation trying to get schools started in urban communities, and that's critical to me. Speaker 1: Explain the Edison relationship. Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, at Edison I'm President of what is called Charter--I'm President of Charter Schools, and essentially we have 136 schools in twenty-five states and--or fifty, close to fifty cities, and those schools basically are low performing schools that the Boards of Education either contract with us to run or the states, as in Chester, Pennsylvania, decide that they are going to take over a district, and they will ask us to manage that district. These are generally African American areas. They're places where the population has left in large measure because they cannot get their kids educated so whether it's Detroit [Michigan] or Inkster [Michigan] or Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] where we're working now, in most cases they've lost population. St Louis [Missouri], they want to reclaim population and reresident those cities, but they can't do it unless they solve the problems of their worst schools so we at Edison come in with a complete program design, and in the sixty-five of the sixty-eight schools that Edison started with prior to this year, we've only lost three of those schools where we did not perform, but the other sixty-five of those schools have performed extremely well. Generally the test scores go up the first year an average of five percent because that's pretty much an orientation year, and then we've had tremendous success in years two, three, and above so it is another of the choices that boards are now making and states are now making to try to make sure that every child gets what is the promise of our Constitution [of the United States], and that is the ability to have the kind of lifestyle that this country guarantees. Speaker 1: Now what about those people who say charter schools or, you know, vouchers take money away from public schools, and it does us more disservice in the long term. What do you say to those people? Speaker 2: Well, I'd say again I don't think vouchers are the answer. I think vouchers again represent a challenge. I think what I say to those people if you don't create some kind of competitive mechanisms, you're going to continue this generational failure, and when you talk about taking money from schools, compare the amount of money that goes into schools with the amount of money that goes into prisons. If we don't educate the kids by some means, then we're going to wind up spending that money anyway, and generally once they become a part of the system with felonies, they become almost non-productive citizens, and so it seems to me it is better to try some things within education than it is to take the risk that we're going to lose more kids who are not going to be able to have the tools necessary to compete in this society, and so I argue that we need to, as we do in every other aspect of life, create as many choices as possible, and I don't think that the issue is the money, for instance, that go into charter schools because our analysis is the average school board puts about forty-five cents on a dollar into the classroom. What makes Edison work is we put seventy-nine cents on a dollar into the classroom, and most of the money in public systems goes into headquarters, as opposed to going into the schoolroom so if it means getting more kids a quality education, it's a risk we take, but I think long term we as African American people have to take that risk because our kids are just not getting educated. Story_ID: 7061 Speaker 1: Now what are your thoughts about faith-based initiatives? Have you been a supporter of that? Speaker 2: I've been a strong supporter. I've embraced it with some reticence on several categories, and my argument--I did [United States] Senate testimony. In my Senate testimony I argued that if you do faith-based initiatives, institutions like Allen [Greater Allen Cathedral, Jamaica, New York] are doing it. We do some of it with federal money. We do some of it with state and city money. We do most of it by starting it out with our own money, and I argued three points, one, that if you're going to do it, there has to be some way to determine the capacity of the organization to do it. Otherwise, all you get is a remake of model cities, and the program does not do what it is intended to do. Secondly, there has to be some technical assistance component to assure that institutions know what it means to co-mingle and does not co-mingle these monies with their operating monies because there's a clear distinction that determines separation of church and state. We don't want to see pastors in jail because they did not understand how the process worked, and thirdly, I argued that even though most supporters of faith-based initiatives don't agree, I believe we still have to mandate the setting of 501c3 [tax-exempt] non-profit corporations so that those monies and those programs can be so isolated that if you choose not to run the programs, you can not run them and still not injure the church or if you choose to run them, they do not mitigate against the church continuing to exist as a faith-based institution, and I think with those caveats it is a good thing to do because right now what the government does is a measure of faith-based, but it is with sole source contracts with major large faith institutions, and the little institutions are then subcontracted to do the work. This way I think it opens up the possibility that a lot of these small institutions that are basically subbing [substituting] for the major institutions will become major institutions themselves and be able to deliver services on the grounds where the people actually are. Speaker 1: What about those who would say that this is a cheap way of the Republican Party buying out one of the more--really, the most predominant force in the black community besides, you know, maybe drugs?? Speaker 2: I think I don't even respond to that. I think it's asinine. I mean the reality is if that is true, then it is what the Democrats [political party] have already done in the past through housing and other programs that they have--they are the biggest buyers, and they get the least return in terms of--and the people get the least return because they sift it through their political apparatus, and that political apparatus generally takes care of a limited number of people. Story_ID: 7062 Speaker 1: I want to really ask you what your concept of the ministry is in many ways, of ministry, you know, what. Speaker 2: My concept of ministry is pretty much defined in Acts 2 [book of the Bible], beginning at the forty-first verse, and it says that once the people had received the Holy Spirit, which means that they received life and power, then they stayed and met the needs of the people daily. My concept of ministry is that you have a holistic design that analyzes needs and then creates possibilities for those needs to be met, and if those needs are met, then people grow in their faith and in their spirit to the degree that they no longer need persons to do for them, but they know that they have been empowered by God to do for themselves. Speaker 1: And the role of the black church or the role of the church in the black community. Maybe that's a better way. Speaker 2: The role of the church in the black community is one, it is the entity that generally represents the hopes of a people who have been in their sojourn from slavery to freedom but have not gotten there yet, and therefore it is obligated to try to assist the process in ways that guarantees a true liberation which means not trading off one level of servitude for another so that the role of the church is to give people not only a liberating message but to give them liberating possibilities so that if you come here, for instance, on a Sunday morning and you hear my offering appeal, it is not just to give your money to the church but understand that if you do it here, it's going to go into your community but also to give your money to yourself because I challenge them to give ten percent to themselves to become homeowners and understand what it means to invest in appreciating assets, and the greatest appreciating asset that they can possibly have is a home, and I think that's what the church's obligation is. Speaker 1: So of your--of those who are in the ministry, you know, and their congregation is, you know, black, what would you challenge your, you know, or do you challenge your fellow practitioners? What do you challenge them? Speaker 2: Well, I think, you know, I obviously challenge them because I'm the--God, I guess I speak every week somewhere in the country to some group. My challenge for them is to rethink ministry in ways that is not sensitive to the moment but sensitive to bringing about true transformation in the life of people. For instance, you have a lot of pastors who, during the civil rights era, that was their ministry. That was their message. That's all they knew. When the civil rights era came to an end, they were so locked in that. You look at huge churches. That church in Chicago [Illinois] where Jackson--what was his name--Reverend Jackson [Joseph Harrison Jackson, Olivet Baptist Church] was--not [Reverend] Jesse Jackson--who was head of the Baptist ministers and all, and you find those kind of churches all over the country because they got so caught up in civil rights, they forgot the basic message of the Gospel which is a liberating message not just for black people but a liberating message for all people, and once you get so locked into mere black ideology, you get to a place where the dynamics of the faith are defined by race, and the race limit--and it places such a limit on people's possibilities. My challenge is to raise people's standard by challenging them to know that there is nothing God has created for anybody else that God did not create for you, and so the abundance of the land belongs to you because you belong to God and because you are in the image of God. Everything that God has created is a part of your being. He created you for abundance. He created you for fruitfulness. He created you for productivity. He created you so that you could become the best person you could be, and that does not have to be racially-tinged. It ought to be sensitive to a reality that there are people of all races who suffer, that there are people of all races who are evil, that there are people of all races who are good, and so the message is always about how do you transfix between this battle, between what some would say God and the devil, which is really the battle between good and evil, and transfix between those two forces? How do you find your sense of being and your sense of grounding so that you can become the best person that God would have you to be? Story_ID: 7063 Speaker 1: So your belief in terms of what is the answer for the black community lies where? Speaker 2: My belief in what the answer for the black community is to understand that the day may come when they not be a black community and that they have to learn how to live in the beloved community of God, and so as the paradigms have shifted by evidence by the most recent census data, which clearly indicates that blacks will not--if they are not already not the largest minority class by definition of whatever a minority is, and the fact that the black shift has moved away particularly in The South and which I think will happen eventually in The North where you really don't have truly segregated communities except the pockets that have been left over, that you have to learn how to live in the environment that you created in large measure through the civil rights movement when you said to your children, "We want you to have access to the best possible education so that you can work in the places where your parents could not work," so that my daughter who works at Morgan Stanley [financial investment company] do not see black people on an everyday basis nor does she live with black people in Brooklyn Heights [New York] in any great numbers because it's a mixed, very mixed community so I can't just give her a black message because that's not a part of her everyday lifestyle, and the thirty-some year olds that I have as executive vice presidents and presidents who work under me at Edison [Edison Schools, New York, New York], those persons are not looking for - and they're black. They've gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]. They've gone to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. They've gone on to Wharton [Wharton Business School, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] . They've gone on to BU [Boston University, Boston Massachusetts] Medical School--I mean MBA [Masters of Business Administration] program and Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] MBA programs. They're not looking for what it means to be black. They're looking for what it means to be able to function in a world where color is not going to be predominant, especially if you are black when the Latino population moves in so where do you go if all you have is your color? You have to have more than that to offer the world which is why I'm constantly arguing for this shift from the racial, personalized, politicized kind of focus to a more education-economic focus because that's where our future really lies. Speaker 1: Your concept of poverty, what would be your definition of poverty on this? Speaker 2: My definition of poverty, I suppose--I haven't thought about it in a long time--is that it is a place where you make a determination about whether this is where you reside permanently. Simply put, what I say to people is if you're in poverty, if you're in public housing, if you're on welfare, understand that this is a place, a time, and a season, but there is a bridge in front of you, and you have to make a decision whether you're going to cross that bridge. Once you decide to cross that bridge, then you no longer allow yourself to be defined by your poverty. You allow yourself to be defined by your possibility, and your possibility is generally greater than your poverty so your decision becomes one of how do I take possibility and make it real, and though I know it can't happen overnight, how do I invest in myself in such a way that I don't do things that are negatively impacting and mitigating against my possibility of getting on the bridge with the determination that if I get on it, I'm going to the other side, and I don't intend to come back across this bridge again. Story_ID: 7064 Speaker 1: They don't understand how to help their children because they think of where they came from, and they're trying to hold onto everything they have. I mean, the greatest struggle I have even right now with my wife is saying hey, "We're not on 2901 Starlings where I grew up or Ethlin where you grew up so you don't--" you gotta give more to your children to put them in a position so that they can come to where we are, and we have more to start them out so we can't talk about well, we didn't have that so we oughta make them do it that way. You can't do it that way. You do what I see these whites do who have been able to build those legacies, and that's invest in their children in ways that puts them in the best possible position to be competitive. We gotta do it. We gotta do it, and that does not mean pampering them to the point where they become almost totally unusable, you know, because you can do that, too, and that's the big question I guess middle class blacks are asking. How much is too much, and how much is too little, and you're trying to find that common ground, and that's not easy. Speaker 2: So what are your hopes for the black community? Do you have them? Speaker 1: Well, you know, my hope for the black community is that it will reach a place where within it all of the dynamics that are operative in any other community are so pronounced that people do not feel an absolute necessity to move out to the county or wherever they choose to go but rather, if it is their choice, they believe they can stay in that community. They can have access to the same amenities and that their life will not be threatened by crime, and that their property values will rise at the same magnitude that they would if they had gone somewhere else. Story_ID: 7065 Speaker 1: Since you're an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] minister and the A.M.E. Church has such a proud position in the black community. Speaker 2: Um hmm. Speaker 1: I'm wondering if you could just talk about, you know--I mean you were raised in the A.M.E. Church. Speaker 2: Um hmm. Speaker 1: You could have chosen maybe another church, and now there are all these - your megachurch, but there are a bunch of these new sort of fangled churches. Speaker 2: Right. Right. Speaker 1: And I'm just wondering, you know, what you feel, you know, what your sense of being part of this tradition is? Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, you know, I think anyone who understands the legacy of [Reverend] Richard Allen, I mean there is this sense of what we do in large measure I think brings to a contemporary life that which Richard Allen was trying to do back in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when he founded the church. The tragedy is that the connection between what Richard Allen did and what happens in Acts [book of the Bible] [Bible verses] 41 through 46 is more realized now in other churches outside of denomination. The fastest growing churches in America today are nondenominational churches, and that's in large measure because the way the rules and regulations and structures of polity within denominations are it's more a European feudal model that says that some hierarchy has the power to determine what's in people's best interest. The reality is post-1960 people do not want to relate to a hierarchy like that. They relate to their own individual church, and if that church is able to produce and be able to meet needs and provide ministries and services for the whole family, that's where people want to be so the churches that are growing are not--we are within denomination and growing but in large measure because we adopt a model that is not necessarily totally compatible to the denomination but much more compatible to the church growth model of other megachurches, and I think the future of the A.M.E. Church really lies in its defining itself, reinventing itself, so to speak, so that individual churches are given a degree of independence and not viewed with a jaundiced eye because within their particular market, there are ministries that they have to do in order to be competitive, and we need to embrace those ministries as opposed to finding them to be something that in some way seems to pollute our sense of what a historical A.M.E. Church is because the historical A.M.E. Church, as we know it, is represented for the most part by churches that are huge empty buildings, and that is a shame when you consider the proud history that we're a part of. Speaker 1: And what do you consider central to the A.M.E. tradition? What makes you proud to be a part of that tradition? Speaker 2: Proud because I realize how it evolved. It evolved when a man dared to stand up and say no, we will not be denied access to God by virtue of your definition of church, and therefore we will go and we will, as he put it, worship at our own fine and fig tree. We will start our own church, and the fact that when Richard Allen started this church, it was the institution that met the needs not only of blacks out of slavery in Philadelphia, but as you remember the disease that swept that city, it was African American church through the Free African Society with Richard Allen and [Reverend] Absalom Jones that actually had to tend to the needs of those families and tend to the needs of varying because the white population, even though they were their people, would not do it, and then to build the credit unions and the insurance groups and all of that that he did, I think it's a wonderful history. We got lost somewhere along the way from slavery to freedom, though. Speaker 1: And your legacy. What do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: I guess if I really think about it seriously, I want my legacy to be one that this church, by virtue of identifying needs, created a new paradigm for ministry for the African American community and a paradigm that is not inconsistent or incompatible with the teachings of Jesus Christ, but one that brings life to those teachings so that people do not view themselves as having mere Bible stories, but the Bible stories, the miracles, the signs, the wonders are evidenced in their life in the things that they're able to see and the things that they're able to be a part of. Story_ID: 7066 Speaker 1: This is the [United States] Congressional Black Caucus, and this picture was the last group in the [United States] Congress that I took a picture with while I was there so this picture would have been in 1996, and as you notice on that picture, myself, Harold Ford [U.S. Representative from Tennessee], [Ronald] Ron Dellums [U.S. Representative from California] are still there, and this was actually our last term in Congress. Speaker 2: [Photo - Floyd Flake with the United States Congressional Black Caucus on the steps of the Capitol, Washington, D.C., 1996] Speaker 1: [MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph] Story_ID: 7067 Speaker 1: These are three couples, ourselves, Jo Ann and Grainger Browning who are pastors of the Ebenezer A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Church down in Fort Washington, Maryland, which is another of the 12,000 member congregations, Renita Weems who is in the African outfit, and her husband Martin, is the most preeminent African American Old Testament [The Bible] scholar in the country, teaches at Vanderbilt University [Nashville, Tennessee], and accepted the call to ministry out of this church, and the Mungin family who pastor a church in Maryland, and we annually do--my wife and I do about four to five marriage enrichment weekends, and so we were the couple facilitators for a marriage enrichment weekend sponsored by Ebenezer Church in Fort Washington. Speaker 2: [Photo - Floyd Flake with his wife and pastors at the Ebenezer African Methodist Episcopal Church in Fort Washington, Maryland (including Rev. Margaret Elaine McCollins Flake, Grainger Browning, Jo Ann Browning, Rev. Renita Weems, Rev. Martin Espinosa, and Mr. and Mrs. Mungin), not dated] Speaker 1: [MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph] Story_ID: 7068 Speaker 1: This is the cover of my book, and it is 'Nine Action Steps to Achieving Your Dreams' titled 'The Way of the Bootstrapper,' and you will note that it has an introduction by [William] Bill Bennett [U.S. Secretary of Education] and a forward by Maxine Waters [U.S. Representative from California]. Most people say that I'm the only person they know who could bring an arch-conservative and a true liberal together on the cover of a book, and what is interesting, both of them knew the other was doing it. I informed them, but both agreed that their relationship with me superseded, and what they thought the book projected was positive and did not have a political limitation, and therefore both of them agreed to support it. Speaker 2: [Photo - Display signage of the cover of Floyd Flake's book, "The Way of the Bootstrapper," 1999] Speaker 1: [MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph] Story_ID: 7069 Speaker 1: This picture was taken by one of my members--by Virginia Stewart, and it was on a day--it was not a pose. It was on a day when we had come out of a session at the Brooklyn [New York] Federal Court, and I'm not sure what I was doing or what the context, but I know we had come out from the trial on that day, and she took that picture. Speaker 2: [Photo - Portrait of Floyd Flake by Virginia Stewart, Brooklyn, New York, not dated] Speaker 1: [MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of b/w photograph. From the collection of Floyd H. Flake.] Story_ID: 7070 Speaker 1: This is my beloved family. My granddaughter is on my lap who is the daughter of my oldest child who is directly behind me. That is Aliya. She is now twenty-five, and on either side of me, Elaine [Reverend Margaret Elaine McCollins Flake], my wife of twenty-five years, and my mother-in-law, Elaine's mother, and then the younger daughter, Nailah, is twenty-three, and the son in the beige suit still is a college student in Georgia at Morris Brown [College] now, and the baby is seventeen and my tallest member of my family, and my youngest son [Harold] Hasan is a senior in high school. That's my wife and her mother. Speaker 2: [Photo - Floyd Flake with his family (Front row, L to R: Mother-in-law, granddaughter, Rev. Margaret Elaine McCollins Flake; Back row, L to R: Robert Rasheed, Aliya, Harold Hasan and Nailah Flake), not dated] Speaker 1: [MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph] Story_ID: 7071 Speaker 1: Those are pictures from my first [United States] Congressional campaign, and they represent various people. It appears that it was on one day of campaigning because I have the same outfit on and pretty much typical of what happens on a day when you go from one stop to another. There was a lot of energy in the campaign, a lot of activity. People everywhere embraced it, and I think the end result was that I was elected to serve without having had a political background so these are just a lot of the people who helped to make it possible. Speaker 2: [Photo - Collage of photographs from Floyd Flake's first U.S. Congressional campaign, 1987] Speaker 1: [MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph] Story_ID: 7072 Speaker 1: This is the [U.S. Democratic] Congressional Black Caucus 1995-'96 [1996], my next to the last term there, and it is representative of a lot of those who came out of the south. In one year we had fourteen new members to come with redistricting, and we grew to our largest number which was thirty-nine in that year so. Speaker 2: What year was that? Speaker 1: This is '95 [1995]-'96 [1996]. Speaker 2: Okay. It was almost like Reconstruction again, huh? Speaker 1: Yes, it was. It was a phenomenal number, and they've been able to hold onto those numbers generally even when there have been replacements, they have still been African Americans in those seats. That may not be the case going forward in that some of the districts, like the one where Cynthia McKinney [U.S. Representative from Georgia] is and where [Melvin] Mel Watt [U.S. Representative from North Carolina] is or Sanford Bishop [U.S. Representative from Georgia], those districts have now become predominantly white districts, and yet they've been able win so the future with this, what I called earlier, paradigm shift may mean some reduction in Caucus size. Most of the members who are now the incumbents leave the seat. Speaker 2: [Photo - Illustration of Floyd Flake and members of the United States Democratic Congressional Black Caucus, 1995-1996] [MPEG-1 digital video copy of Beta SP videotape of color photograph]..