 Story_ID: 526272 Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer. And Scott Stearns is the videographer, and observing is Tom Leonardis who's been your manager (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I've been scratching forever. Speaker 1: --for twenty, thirty years. So-- Speaker 2: Partners, we've been partners. Speaker 1: Partners (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I have no manager. Speaker 1: Okay, okay-- Speaker 2: I'm unmanageable (laughter). Speaker 1: So I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us? Speaker 2: Okay, I have numerous names, but I'll start with the one you're probably most familiar with. W-H-O-O-P-I, G-O-L-D-B-E-R-G [HistoryMaker Whoopi Goldberg]. That's the Whoopi Goldberg part, but my other name is C-A-R-Y-N, Caryn, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, Johnson [Caryn Elaine Johnson]. That's also me (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Elaine is your middle name. Speaker 2: Yes, but I never-- Speaker 1: Never use it, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I never understood why I had it (laughter). Speaker 1: And what about your, your date of birth? Speaker 2: Eleven, thirteen, fifty-five [November 13, 1955]. Speaker 1: And your place of birth? Speaker 2: New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: St. Vincent's Hospital [St. Vincent's Hospital Manhattan, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. And what would you consider your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an actor, yeah. Story_ID: 526273 Speaker 1: Now, we ask five People magazine-ish questions, just short answers. Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Your favorite food? Speaker 2: Potato chips. Speaker 1: Favorite color? Speaker 2: Black. Speaker 1: Favorite time of year? Speaker 2: Christmas. Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation? Speaker 2: My house. Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Can I say it? Fuck it. Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). It goes down for history (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you know. Story_ID: 526274 Speaker 1: So I want to ask you about your growing up. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And I would like to know about both of your parents. So let's talk about your mother first. Speaker 2: All right. Speaker 1: Her name? Speaker 2: My mom's name was Emma Johnson [Emma Harris Johnson]. She grew up in Harlem [New York, New York]. My dad's name was Robert Johnson. He grew up in Harlem. So they met. And my mom had another son called Clyde [Clyde Johnson], who's my big brother. He's no longer with us. And the three of us were together on 26th Street in Chelsea [New York, New York]. And my mother made magic happen throughout my childhood. I didn't know I was poor 'cause I lived in the projects, but the projects then were where people who didn't have any money, lived. But, so you had a smattering of every conceivable race, creed, color. And so you had to learn how to speak a smattering of Senegalese or Spanish or Greek. You had to be able to, be able to say, "Hello, Mr. So-and-So. Can So-and-So come out to play?" Or, "Hello, Mr. So-and-So, may I use the bathroom" or what time--: "Hello, Mr. So-and-So, what time is it?" If you could do those three things with folks' parents, you were, you were golden. And so I grew and I, pretty much knowing that New York [New York] was the center of the world and anything I wanted to know, I could find because we had the best libraries and the best museums, and, you know, the best food, though we didn't really go out much. My mother was not big on restaurants because we didn't have any money. But she liked vegetables, which is why I try not to put a vegetable near my lips. I grew up eating vegetables that nobody else was eating at the time, bok choy, okay, 'cause it was inexpensive, inexpensive stuff that she could make with, you know, sizzling--it was in something or, you know, I'm not a cook. So I don't know what it was, but she would make--I'm not a big food person. But she would make it, and, you know, she'd say, "You know, you need to try this." I'm like, (shakes head), "No." Story_ID: 526275 Speaker 1: So what was your mother's [Emma Harris Johnson] background? Where was she from originally? Speaker 2: She's from New York [New York]. Speaker 1: From New York. Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so and her--your grandparents, did you know them? Speaker 2: I did not know them. I knew my grandfather. My grandfather was called Malakiah Johnson [sic. Malakiah Harris]. But he fought in World War I [sic. World War II, WWII] and so when he came back, he instructed everyone to call him Malachi. Okay, yeah. Malakiah did all kinds of amazing things. He somehow found himself at--for a little while, with Patrice Lumumba. I don't know how. I have no idea. Then there was something that he may or may not have been a pirate. No one knows for sure. But that's the--I mean he was quite a character and loved photography. So my grandmother and grandfather separated. He started a different family, and my mom didn't see him, I think as much as she would have liked to have, but she was always a big fan of his. So we got to see him as often as we could. Story_ID: 526276 Speaker 1: So tell me about growing up, you and your, your brother [Clyde Johnson] and your mother [Emma Harris Johnson]? Can you tell me a little bit about some of the times together? Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll tell you about some good times and some, about some not-so-good times. I'll tell you about the not-so-good times. My mom got ill when I was eight or nine. I think she had a nervous breakdown, and, you know, in those days, you could not, you--children were not allowed to go to the hospitals to see them. So she virtually disappeared for two or three years. But my dad [Robert Johnson] (laughter) came to take care of us, and my dad was a gay man. And so he did his best, you know. So he put a Lilt pearl--perm in my hair. Now Lilt, 'cause only we remember Lilt, Lilt was a permanent wave solution that was really for white women. And my father felt that my hair should be wavy. So he put a Lilt perm in my hair (laughter). And so, some of my hair broke off. And then they had to sort take care of the rest of it, yeah. And then my cousin who's called Arlene, who grew up with mother--they grew up kind of, you know, literally, side-by-side, but Arlene was a redhead 'cause her mom had a German husband, slash boyfriend--who can say. But they grew up next to each other. So one was called Arlene and the other one is called Monica [ph.]. That was my mom. So I learned about a lot of this after-the-fact. But, so she got sick, and, and she was gone for a while. And when she came back I--the way I described her was like, it sounds like my mother, looks like my mother. It's not my mother. It's like invasion of the body snatchers because what you learn later on is that they used-- Speaker 1: Electric shock therapy. Speaker 2: Yes, yeah. So when I got much older, and my brother and I would talk to her about it because I think it was a, a pivotal time. I think it's when I came into my own because I realized suddenly that people go--can go away like that. And so that was like, okay, I need to learn how to take care of myself so I can be self-sufficient. So my brother and I said, so what, what was that like? And she said, "Well, I don't remember a lot of it." She said, and that was the hardest thing "'Cause I never, ever wanted to look like I was ill again." I never wanted to seem like I didn't feel good. So my mother never went to another doctor after she got home, ever, because she didn't want anyone to say, "Oh, you look odd or something." So she just never went into a hospital, and never went to a doctor. And I said, but, you know, what happened? She said, "Well, when I came home, I didn't really know you guys. But I had to fake it because (laughter) I didn't wanna go back." So she got to learn about us all over again. And as kids, my brother and I--no, as adults, we shared a lot of information, 'cause I'd say, "Did this really, did this happen? Do you remember this?" And he'd go, "Yeah, yeah, but I don't remember it that way. I remember it like this." So we sort of raised my mom, and then she went on to become an amazing Head Start teacher and just an amazing woman. She worked at the Hudson Guild in Chelsea [New York, New York] as a Head Start teacher. And they liked her so much that they put her through college, and she, you know, graduated NYU [New York University, New York, New York] and, you know, and had a lot of kids come through her class, the Wayans brothers were her kids and all kinds of amazing stuff. And then I, of course, I got famous and said, "You wanna get outta here?" And she's like, "Yes, I'd like to." I said, "Okay, when can you come?" And she said, "Well, when would you like me?" I said, "I'll send you a ticket for next week." So my mother came. She got off the plane. She had a paper bag with her. And we went, and I was gonna take her to the bags. I said, "Where's your bag?" She said, "I didn't bring any." I said, "Are you, you plan to go--?" She said, "No, no. I just locked up the place and left." She locked up, 288 10th Avenue, apartment 6D and never looked back. She took nothing. Fresh start, clean start. Speaker 1: That's an amazing story. Speaker 2: She was an amazing woman (laughter). She was amazing woman. Speaker 1: Do you know what her illness was? Do you know? Did she ever know that (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nervous breakdown, I guess, whatever the-- Speaker 1: She had a nervous--too much, things too much (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know, yeah, thing--I think it, it did become, it became overwhelming because, you know, I guess in those days, you know, you would go and try to fight and try to get things done. And, you know, judges would look at you and say, you know, not really pay attention to the fact that you actually needed help. So she said, "I, you know, I tried as hard as I could and, and then I--." She said, "I just, I don't know what happened." Story_ID: 526277 Speaker 1: So you say your father [Robert Johnson] was a gay man? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: How do--well, how do you know that? Or is that post knowing? Speaker 2: 'Cause I knew his boyfriend (laughter). That's how I knew. And he was very clear about it. It wasn't, it wasn't a sec- I mean we didn't have that. It might have been a secret to other people. It wasn't a secret to me. And then he told my brother [Clyde Johnson] and it wasn't a secret to him. Speaker 1: So this is--so your mother [Emma Harris Johnson] comes back at age twelve, is that around? Speaker 2: Twelve, thirteen, yeah. Speaker 1: Twelve, thirteen, but that's also when your father's incar- was he incarcerated? Speaker 2: Never. Speaker 1: No, no. What happened with your father though--oh, no, no. I'm getting the wrong--okay, that's right. So your father comes and lives, I'm sorry-- Speaker 2: He comes--my mom gets sick (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: He comes and looks after us, along with my cousin. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And when my mom comes back, he stays a couple of days and, and he goes on about his life. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 526278 Speaker 1: At what point do you sort of veer off yourself, in a way? I mean or, or is it the teenage years I mean (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I think it was after the Lilt perm (laughter). It was after the Lilt perm and me realizing, oh, he [Goldberg's father, Robert Johnson] doesn't know what to do. None of these people know what to do. They don't, they don't know how to--oh, man (laughter). And so I think my brother [Clyde Johnson] and I both sort of stomped around and went and did other stuff because it was just like, you guys don't know what to do. And you--we can't go see our mother [Emma Harris Johnson], and we can't tell her anything, so we're kind of--we have to try to work through this until y'all are gone. And then my mom comes, and she's totally different. She's not the woman we knew. So I think we all just sort of--my brother veered off. I veered off. I started having adventures in different kinds of worlds and drug worlds and just crazy worlds. And my brother, I think, did the same thing. And then it was like, oh, well, now, you're here. So we have to sort of figure out how to live. We all have to figure out how to live together. Story_ID: 526279 Speaker 1: So how are you as a student? Who, who else is looking out for you guys, though, at that point, just the-- Speaker 2: Just the two. Just my (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the two. Speaker 2: Yeah, and, you know, I, as it turns out, am a dyslexic, and no one really had any idea what that was. They knew I was smart. They knew if you told me stuff, I could remember it. So school wasn't of interest because I found it just hard. So I think I got out in--I went to two weeks of the ninth grade and thought, this is insane. And when I said to my mom [Emma Harris Johnson], "I, I just don't think I can do this." She said, "Well, here's what I want you to do. I want you to find four, four museums. I want you to go to the natural history museum [American Museum of Natural History, New York, New York]. I want you to go to the Metropolitan art museum [Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York], and I want you to sit in on lectures. And if you can commit to that, and I'll send you to--," you know, the New York Public Library [New York, New York]. They have lectures, and, you know, could do this for no money. You can go to these places and sit and get this information and sort of learn. But for me it was great because I could look at things and I understood what was, what I was seeing. You could ask questions of the lecturers. And so she said, "If we can do that, that will help me know that you're not doing anything you're not supposed to be doing, and I will feel more comfortable." Now, was I off also doing things I wasn't supposed to be doing? Of course, I was because it was the '60s [1960s] and that's what you did. But I was very lucky. I was very lucky. I had somebody who understood something was different. We just didn't know what. And I think she understood because she was different. Story_ID: 526280 Speaker 1: So, things like, 'cause you talk about your first encounter with sex and, you know, and the abortion and all (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you know, abortions. So is she aware or is she sort of--you're-- Speaker 2: No, I tell--I told my mother [Emma Harris Johnson] everything. I told her everything because that was important for us, and she always said, you can tell me everything. I'm not gonna like everything, but you c- you should tell me. And let's see what we can do as opposed to telling other people, and then I hear it, in a round-about sort of way. Story_ID: 526281 Speaker 1: So what other things are influencing you then? Can we talk about that, the '60s [1960s] and what's influencing you? Speaker 2: Well, music is influencing me, and the idea that change is in the wind. And I wanna be part of the change. I want to be part of the change. I wanted to, I wanted to go to England. I wanted to go all over the place. And then I didn't know if I was gonna be able to. I didn't know if I could, but I knew there was more than New York [New York]. I knew there was more than New York. And suddenly, it was like, oh, Beatles, what are those? Oh, Rolling Stones, sure, oh, my God. Look at--fuck, oh, my God, Motown. Motown's gone to London [England]. Oh, my God, the rest of the world, I can go to the rest of the world too? You know. But my desire to, to know things sort of kept me from getting too far gone into stuff, you know, and people that were very smart for me, friends of mine, who were aware, friends that I made along the way. You know, you go sit, and you watch theater for free in the park, and you go see it in your neighborhood. And so you sort of make friendships and stuff. And people say to you, you know, you shouldn't be doing that. You should, you should be doing something else. And you say, ah, I don't know, I don't know. And you go off, and then, they're not gonna tell your mom, but they're gonna grab you and say, listen, we're not gonna let you do this. You, you're hurting yourself. You're gonna hurt yourself, you know. And then you find out that she was aware. And so it gave them sort of permission to look out for you. So when they cleaned you up and said, now, you know, you got all that stuff outta your system. You're good. And that, we never--she and I never discussed it 'til I was way old. Speaker 1: So she knew that the--you know, 'cause this was a time of a lot of experimentation-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --you know, it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: --anything that goes. Speaker 2: Everything went (laughter). And this is probably why I'm the person I am today because, you know, the conversations we were having, whether they be about race or they be about drugs or they be about sex, you know, we were having them. We were having them and talking about things, not like today. Story_ID: 526282 Speaker 1: You go to Catholic school at first, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: And you're--you go there until what--? Speaker 2: Eighth grade. Speaker 1: Eighth grade. And that was St. Columbia Catholic-- Speaker 2: St. Columba [St. Columba Catholic School, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Columba-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --Columba, sorry about that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's all right. Speaker 1: Columba. And so then, then where do you, you go then, after eighth grade, you go where? Speaker 2: Well, I tried to go to Julia Richman [Julia Richman High School; Julian Richman Education Complex, New York, New York] (laughter), and I went for a couple weeks (laughter). And it was like, I don't like this. I don't understand it. I don't like it. I'm having a hard time. And so I finally broke down and told my mom [Emma Harris Johnson]. And that was the deal we made. Speaker 1: So that's when she said you could go-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --so almost like home schooling in some respect. Speaker 2: Yes, yes, but New York [New York] home schooled me. Speaker 1: New York home school. That's right. But I thought that you were at Washington Irving High School [New York, New York]. Is that not right? Speaker 2: That's right, Washington Irving, not Julia Richman, Washington Irving. You know, it's been a while (laughter), been a while. Speaker 1: But it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my mother went to Julia Richman, maybe my mother went. I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay, so but it was Washington Irving-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Washington Irving. Speaker 1: And that's at--it's 16th [Street] between 16th and 17th [Street]. Speaker 2: Yes, I think so. They haven't turned it into a condo. Story_ID: 526283 Speaker 1: Okay, so I also read that you became addicted to cocaine around that time, no (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, never was addicted to cocaine then. Speaker 1: Look at this. This-- Speaker 2: Oh, there's a lot of stuff that's out there that isn't quite-- Speaker 1: I hate this, I hate this. I'm sorry. Speaker 2: But that's all right. That's all right. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: I did heroin at that time. Cocaine wasn't available. Speaker 1: At that time. Speaker 2: Cocaine came-- Speaker 1: Later? Speaker 2: --you know, in the '80s [1980s] and stuff, yeah. But, yeah. Speaker 1: That's right. So, but you also had your daughter (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I got--I, after I cleaned up-- Speaker 1: After you cleaned up. Speaker 2: --I went to a place called Horizon House [New York, New York], which used to be on 16th [Street] and 5th [Avenue]. Speaker 1: So who got you to go to Horizon House? Speaker 2: Well, nobody actually got me to go. I happened to be going past (laughter), I happened to be going past, and they were having like this young people thing. There was music playing and all kinds--so I walked in. It was like a, not daycare center, it was like a drop-in center. And so I dropped in, just because I happened to be passing. And I saw a cute guy, and I went in. And so (laughter), you know, they were talking about, you know, you can't, can't play in this arena. You got to get out of it or you have to make a, a real decision that you're gonna be a drug addict, and let us show you what they look like. Let us show you what that life is. And so they had all these great conversations, you know, and you could go, and you could talk about your problems, and, you know, hear other people's problems. And it was a group. And it didn't cost anything. And so you could go and hang out, and it got you off the street and, so I would go. And I really liked the guy. So (laughter) I was there for about, about a year, and, you know, was, just stopped doing everything 'cause the--what they were showing me was what I didn't want. I, I knew that. But, and then it turned out, the guy liked me too. So we start hanging out, and we got married, which was really kind of silly. We could a just done a whole thing, but we didn't, veil, the whole thing, and got married. And about a year and a half later, had Alex [Alex Martin] who's our daughter. And then it just--well, I'm not--I discovered at this age what I didn't really wanna face earlier, and that is, I don't wanna be married. I don't really like it. You have to pay a lot of attention to other people, (laughter) and think about how they feel. And I think that wasn't what I wanted to do because I knew I wanted to be an actor. I knew I wanted to do other things. So it just, it wasn't good. And so I said, I'm, I'm gonna go, I'm gonna go (laughter), and get out of here. They said, hm, all right. It like, okay. So I went and lived with my mom [Emma Harris Johnson]. Speaker 1: So that was--Alvin Martin, was his name, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes. Story_ID: 526284 Speaker 1: What point do you know you wanna be an actor? I mean this is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Birth. Birth, it's, it's all I've ever known I wanted to be. This is what my mother [Emma Harris Johnson] told me. This might have influenced me. She said, "When you were born," she said, "you came out, and your face turned towards the light." And she said, "That's when I knew (laughter). That's when I knew." And she said that and, and who knows if this is her lore about me, but she said, "The doctors were going, 'Look at, she's looking into the light. So, yeah, we know what that's gonna happen--what's gonna happen with that. That's gonna be an actor.'" Yeah. Speaker 1: So, but when did your training start then? It's-- Speaker 2: I went to first grade, my first show. I played a teapot, and I was very good, got a lot of acclaim, sang, and always was in children's theater, always, so doing plays at St. Columba [St. Columba Catholic School, New York, New York] or just anywhere that I could find a place to do stuff because as an actor, I could, in my mind, go anywhere. I would be anything. I could be anyone. I could look anywhere I wanted to. If I wanted to look like a Martian, I could look like a Martian in my head, and I believed I knew what that felt like. So I could do it. If I needed to play a horse, I knew how to, I knew how to do that. So the idea that any, I could have any existence I chose was amazing to me. And it never occurred to me that watching the million-dollar movie. You know, these movies were shot in the '30s [1930s] and the '20s [1920s], you know. And I, I just saw myself coming downstairs in the lame. I didn't know, you know, and I saw the Mammie characters and stuff, but I didn't know--it never occurred to me that I wasn't gonna have that house (laughter). I wasn't gonna come down those stairs, you know, and my mother never said, well, you know, that's not open to you. She never, she (laughter) never said, there are going to be issues because she felt if I really meant what I said, and wanted to be what I said I wanted to be, I would figure it out. And I did, wasn't 'til I got to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] that I realized that apparently, I was supposed to long for other stuff. But, you know. Speaker 1: So you--when do you start formal training though, as an actress? That's what--I mean-- Speaker 2: I went, listen, I went to some classes with Vinnette Carroll [Vinnette Justine Carroll], and she put me in a show she was doing, and then we started rehearsals, and started doing stuff. And then she fired me. And I went home and I was cr- like, I didn't understand. And my mom said, "What's the matter?" I said, "Well, they say I can't be in the play anymore." And she was like, "What?" "She said I can't be in the play." My mother went down Vinnette's studio and said, "What is going on?" And basically, she said, "We found somebody better, like, okay, okay, yeah." So that was my first WTF moment (laughter) 'cause, you know, it's like, what do you mean, found somebody better? And never explained it. She just, you know, it was her prerogative. She found somebody she liked more. And then I spent about a month and a half at Lee Strasberg's studio, and then he kind of said, look, this is not for you. You, you're not, you don't--you-- Speaker 1: A method actor (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. A method actor. Speaker 2: And so years later, when I met Anna Strasberg, who is his wife, I said, "You know, I, I went to some of these classes." She said, "Well, you had to have been good enough to get in the class." I said, "Yes." She said, "What happened?" I said, "He said I wasn't gonna make it." She said, "Oh, I can't wait to tell him about you" (laughter). And so his response to her, 'cause he was ill at the time. She said, "Well, you can be wrong once." Yeah, kind of great. Story_ID: 526285 Speaker 1: Are you auditioning for parts or you just--I mean what are you--that's what I'm trying to--I'm trying to figure out the formation 'cause I, I know you spent some time or this is what I read, which might be wrong, in East Germany. You, you were traveling. Speaker 2: But that's a, that's later. Speaker 1: That's later, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's much later. That's much later. Speaker 1: So this is, you're talking about then, are you eighteen, nineteen? Speaker 2: Yeah, eighteen, nineteen. It's just before I go to California. It's just before I go to California. Speaker 1: So what takes you to California? Speaker 2: A guy (laughter), another guy who said, "I am going home, but I need somebody to watch my kid while I'm doing stuff 'cause my wife's gone." And he said, "Would you be interested in that job?" Because we'd been--we became friends. He was doing 'Dracula' at, at the Hudson Guild Theater [New York, New York]. And I said, yeah, I would be interested 'cause I had, I had my baby, and I thought well, I, I could do that, and it's a way to get to California. So I said to my mom [Emma Harris Johnson], "I'm gonna take a trip (laughter), I'm gonna go to California. And I don't know how that's gonna work, but I'm going to California." And she said, "Are you sure?" And I said, "Yes." And she said, "All right. Keep me, keep me posted." So I--we drove to, first to Lubbock, Texas where his child was going to be dropped off by his former mother-in-law. And so I took care of the kid, and we were at the Hayloft Dinner Theater [Manassas, Virginia], in black and white country, oil and cotton (laughter). And we did that for, I think a month. And then we drove to San Diego [California], which I had never heard of before. I'd heard of Los Angeles [California] 'cause that's where they did 'Shindig!' and, you know, 'Hullabaloo.' But San Diego? And it was a beautifully, small, little town, gorgeous and, and I loved California. And then I realized I didn't wanna work for this man (laughter). So I, I stopped doing that, and thought, oh, shit, oh, shoot, what am I gonna do, I don't have any money. I don't know what to do. So I applied for welfare, and I got twenty-six dollars every two weeks and food stamps and all I wanted to do was get off of welfare 'cause people could come to your house at any time, and, and, you know, welfare in California at that time was vastly different (laughter) than, I think, welfare here 'cause you could go outside. You could be in the sun and so I, you know, I got myself a little place, me and Alex [Goldberg's daughter, Alex Martin], and, you know. Then we moved from there and moved to a treehouse. And we lived in the treehouse for a long time. And I made friends with the actor's company, the company that he had been working for. And so that was the San Diego Rep [San Diego Repertory Company]. And so I became one of their, one of their actors, and I learned a lot there 'cause they did rep- you know, so you're running across the stage and you don't have--you know, the depth of the backstage is like this. So you can't be really delicate. So you're letting air go, and here's a--geez, you're like a whoopee cushion, like a whoopee cushion. It's like, yeah, I know, but what am I gonna do, you know. Story_ID: 526286 Speaker 1: And at the same time, I went to beauty school because I got a scholarship from, I don't--I think it was the man who ran the school either met his wife or sister or something. And she was saying, "Well, what do you do?" I said, "Well, I'm, you know, gonna be an actor," and I--she said, "Well, wouldn't you like to learn a trade of some sort?" And I said, "Yeah, but (laughter), I don't have trade--I have a baby [Alex Martin]." She said, I'm--so she called and said, "Would you like to go to beauty school (laughter)?" I was like, "Sure, sure" (laughter). So I went to the Deloux School of Cosmetology [San Diego, California]. It sounds like a fake name, but it wasn't. The Deloux School of Common- Cosmetology. And I went and I did something to a lady that was done to me, accidentally. In the old days, you know, you had those permanent wave rods. And you had to ask the people, do you have anything in your hair because I'm pouring chemicals on your hair, and I don't want these chemicals to interact within there. Women would go, "No, no, this is my natural hair color," and you can feel when the--'cause, you know, the shaft--it's a whole thing. But you can feel when somebody's got color on their hair. And so you'd have to go to the teacher and say, "I've made her aware that this has chemicals in it, and that it will not bode well for her if she's not telling me the truth." So the teacher came over, and said, "Are you wearing--you have chemicals," said, "do you have any chemical--?" "No, no, no, I'm--," and so the teacher said, "Go ahead." So (laughter) wrapped her hair in all those rods, and I put the chemical on it, and it started to smoke. And so I had to (laughter), grab this old lady and throw her into the sink, and, and wet her hair. And, of course, it broke off at the rod. So she had this much hair. And she said, "Well, why didn't you tell me this?" And the teacher said, "I did tell you. She told you. I heard her tell you." And it's one of the things you learn about how to deal in the world, it's like, you gotta tell people what's going on because otherwise, you'll lose your hair (laughter), you know. I mean it's, it's nuts. So it just--all these weird little lessons. So, you know, my mom [Emma Harris Johnson] used to drop weird lessons on me too. Story_ID: 526287 Speaker 1: You were saying that your mother [Emma Harris Johnson], you could (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --she would--taught you little lessons too, and I'm just wondering, 'cause how old are you--it, I mean you went to beauty school [Deloux School of Cosmetology, San Diego, California]. Did you do, did you last? Speaker 2: Yes, I, I did hair on dead people. I went and worked in the, in the morgue. And I'll tell you what happened then, but I'll tell you first my mom's story. So I was not the most popular kid in school. And so there were times when the, you know, the popular kids would hurt your feelings and stuff. And there were a couple of us who were kind of, just different. And one day we were going on a class trip, and my mom was one of the moms that went. And for some reason I--the popular kids liked me that day. And they were just, you know, I was, I was one of the popular kids. And so when we got home I was so, I was (unclear) because I was so, like, did you see, they liked--it was really great today. And she said, "Yeah, I saw you were having a very good time." She said, "How do you think Robert's [ph.] day was?" Now, Robert was one of the kids like me who didn't get a lot of, you know, but we stuck together. And when she said that I knew exactly what she was saying. And that was that I had turned into one of those kids to my friend, my best friend, Robert, and hurt him. I said, "Well." She says, "Yeah, yeah, I, I saw how you did your friend. I remember how you cried when people hurt your feelings. I was just wondering how you think you did." So it was just like, okay, let me, let me just--you're right (laughter). I messed up, big lesson number one. Lesson number two, my best friend, Rosie [ph.] and I--Rosie lived on the seventh floor. I lived on the sixth. We're going to see Zeffirelli's [Franco Zeffirelli] 'Romeo and Juliet.' And I, you know, I have a giant afro, I'm just a hippie kid, I'm just a hippie kid, overall. I looked, basically how I (laughter), how I look now (laughter), with a smaller head of hair. And Rosie came down, and she looked at me, and she said, "Are you going like that, just like that?" And I was like, yeah. She's like, "No, I'm not going with you if you look like that." And I was like, what's the matter--I'm clean. I, I don't know--she said, "I'm--no, you have to change your clothes." And I said, "Look, I'm not gonna do that." She said, "Well, then I'm gonna go." And she went. And so I said to my mother, "Was I wrong?" And my mother said, "Do you think you were wrong?" I said, "Well, no, I don't think I was wrong." She said, "But you, you're not sure." She said, "Are you comfortable with how you look?" I said, "Yeah." She said, "Do you care enough to change your clothes because somebody didn't like what you had on?" I said, "No, because I, I think I have the right to wear what I want to as long as I'm clean and I'm not bad." She said, "So did you do the wrong thing?" I said, "I don't know." And she said, "Well, you have to make a decision. Do you want people to like you all the time? If you don't--if you want people to like you all the time, then you're gonna have to question everything you do 'cause it's gonna--somebody's not gonna like it. But if you can handle having people say, 'I'm not gonna go with you,' then you should be fine." And I said, "Okay." She said, "Yeah, because, you know, you have to--there's a lot of people in the world. But if you can't look yourself in the mirror, that's where your problem is gonna be. Now, you can run with the crowd," she said. "It's nothing wrong with that. But if, if you plan to be an individual, gonna be a lot of times people don't like you because of what you say or how you look or how you feel. And if you can handle that, you'll be fine." I was like, okay, and Rosie and I are still friends (laughter). And she went to the movies. But she says we both went, but I don't remember that 'cause I remember having this conversation with my mother who, who gave me permission to be me, you know. Speaker 1: Which is a pretty powerful thing. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Most parents don't necessarily, you know, do that. Speaker 2: Well, I think because she understood that I was different, and that it might be difficult for me because I was different and wanted to do things that other people didn't think about doing or wanna do. Nobody we knew wanted to be an actor, but we knew several actors, [HistoryMaker] Hattie Winston, who was the first black woman to appear in a national commercial. Her mom was our downstairs neighbor. And so we all got around that television when she was doing that Zest commercial, when, the first time, when's doing, she's washing up, and we were all like, "Look at us on TV, look at us in a commercial." You know. Story_ID: 526288 Speaker 1: So tell me what, what--how many were in the repertory [San Diego Repertory Company] in that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There--well, because it was a repertory company, it would always shift and change. But there are probably thirty people that you played with all the time. And then, you know, having lived there for a--living in San Diego [California], meeting people and meeting theater people and, you know, making friends with four or five women that were just these really strong, crazy, funny women. We all had kids, and we hung out. And you'd go do the theater. So at Christmastime, you know, I'd be doing 'A Christmas Carol,' so I'd be Mrs. Fezziwig and I'd be, you know, the Ghost of Christmas Present or Christmas Past, you know, depending on what you could get. And so, you know, I'd do a Mother Courage, I mean just all kinds of stuff, and knowing that the theater is supposed to be a place where people can come and be anything they choose. That's what the theater is for, and it got very restrictive, you know, it's--in the last, in the last little while, where, you know, well, you can only do this. You can only do that. But, of course, 'Hamilton' ['Hamilton: An American Musical,' Lin Manuel-Miranda] has reminded people of what the theater can be and should be. So, you know, having a good time playing all these things. I worked with [HistoryMaker] James Avery before--yeah, we were together before we got famous. Speaker 1: That's right, I remember that he said he was in San Diego (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: So you were in the same repertory company? Or-- Speaker 2: We're in the same area-- Speaker 1: In the same area. Speaker 2: --passing through, yeah. Speaker 1: Passing through. Speaker 2: But there was, you know, it was great (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who else was--who were the five women? Do you remember any of their names? Speaker 2: I do, but now that you ask me, I--when I said it, as soon as I said, it went (sound), right out. Story_ID: 526289 Speaker 1: So, how long were you in San Diego [California]? Speaker 2: I say I had to have been there about ten years because Alex [Alex Martin] was two so, '74 [1974], so I left in '75 [1975], and went to San Diego, and then I think I went to Berkeley [California] ten years later--no, no, no, no. Speaker 1: No? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: So wait a minute. I have '82 [1982] that you're--and I'm not losing my mind. I'm getting away, so what--I have that as, your first on--I hope this is--that's what, I have-- Speaker 2: Got it. Speaker 1: --okay (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I have to get, I have to get my chronology. So '74 [1974], '75 [1975], '76 [1976], '77 [1977], '78 [1978], '79 [1979], '80 [1980], so there seven years. Speaker 1: You're in San Diego. Speaker 2: I'm in San Diego. I meet another guy who says, we have to--and I watched their work, and I think I wanna go, I wanna do what they're doing. Now, in the interim, I've performed with lots of different people, worked with lots of people, made friends with Robin Williams. He used to go to The Comedy Store [The Comedy Store South Pacific Beach, San Diego, California; The Comedy Store La Jolla, La Jolla, California] down in San Diego, and we would do--I would do improv at--I'm trying to remember the other place. There were four or five of us who were doing improv. We were called--shit. We weren't called shit. I can't remember what we were called, Spontaneous Combustion, whew. And there were three or four of us--four or five of us in that. And from that, I went to Victor and Goldberg 'cause Victor, Don Victor was a guy who was a really interesting, what do you call it, like you would have stuff, toys and stuff, and that was his comedy. And then I would do my show, and then we'd combine shows. So we were Victor and Goldberg for a while. And we got to do some kind of--somebody was making some, some television show with Avery Schreiber. And I got the part and Don didn't. So that began this idea that I had the skills that I needed to go and do the stuff I wanted to do because I'd gotten this job. In the interim, then I meet the Blake Street Hawkeyes who come down to San Diego to do five, four or five shows. So it was just like, I wanna go with you guys (laughter). And so I sat down with Alex who was, you know, seven, maybe, and I say, "So, wanna try something new?" And she's like, "Okay." I said, "So we're gonna go to San Francisco [California]." She said, "What's that?" I said, "I don't know, but that's where we're going." So we drove in a, in a Flintstone Volkswagen that had no brakes (laughter), I was using the handbrakes to stop, to a place called Theater Artaud [Project Artaud] which is a place in San Francisco that is, one, two three--four city blocks, giant warehouse where all these artists and dancers and painters and singers and just artisans were living, and so we stayed there for a little while. Story_ID: 526290 Speaker 1: Until we moved over to Berkeley [California] with my friend, Dave Schein [David Schein]. And I lived there until '83 [1983], but Dave and I became an item. And we started working on shows. They did separate, they did solo shows. I'd never heard of a solo show before, but they did solo shows, the Hawkeyes [Blake Street Hawkeyes] did. So I wrote a solo show for myself. And then Dave and I wrote shows together, and he said, "We have this invitation to go to East Germany, we're going to Germany first, and then we'll slip in." I'm like, what? (Laughter) Wait a minute. What. He said, "It'll be fine, you'll be fine." So that was my first trip abroad. We went to France, to France, Germany, and, and the Netherlands, which was fantastic. And so we slipped back and forth, and I believe that everyone was aware because it was too easy. It was too easy to do, to get-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --you know. Yes, I just clapped when I (unclear). And so two of us would slip across, and two more would slip out. And we'd go and do our, our pieces, our theater pieces. And we stayed, and on the designated day, the third or fourth day, you know, that night we would slip back out. And when I (laughter) told my mother [Emma Harris Johnson] what we had done, she said, "Are you, are you crazy? Why would you do that?" I was like, "It was an exchange." She said, "No, no, no, no, no. No, don't do this again. Don't do it again." I was--and I was like, okay. And I said to Dave, "What the hell, man." And he said, "Well, you know, it's the only time these actors can get out." And so we'd go in and we'd--I said, like, okay (laughter), okay. So we ended up, we were in the (unclear), we were in Berlin [Germany], we were in, where else, Bautzen, Bautzen [Germany]. We were in--we were all over Germany, but slipping into East Germany is probably one of the, the best things I think I ever did. Speaker 2: Well, that--because it was Communist at that point. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: The wall [Berlin Wall] was up. Speaker 1: The wall was up. And the fact that it was really kind of easy for us to do, as I look back on it, tells me that there were a lot of people involved in getting us in and out, and getting these actors in and out, you know, because they could go for four days and do their shows, you know. And it was kind of great. Now, I couldn't go walking because our--not hard to find me in East Germany, you know. So, you do the shows, and invited an audience, and you knew who they were, but I--you know, you didn't go outside. And there was no reason to go outside 'cause it nasty, nasty, nasty, ugly, made me not a fan of communism, you know, 'cause everybody always says, you know, in the '60s [1960s], "Yeah, man, we should be, you know, communism should--" unh-uh. When you see it, when you see what it looks like and what it does to the people, unh-uh, not at all. Story_ID: 526291 Speaker 1: Are you doing these single shows there? Is that what you're doing? Speaker 2: Yeah, we're doing--Dave [David Schein] is doing his show, which was called 'Out Comes Butch,' and I was just doing 'The Spook Show' [Whoopi Goldberg]. And it was just these series of characters that I did. Speaker 1: So that's what I'm wondering. Where are the series of characters developing, 'cause is this-- Speaker 2: This is the, this is the time. Speaker 1: This the time. Speaker 2: This is the time. Speaker 1: So it--does it start in San Diego [California], San Diego when you're--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: No, the, the team starts in San Diego, that teamwork, and I--when I got to the San Francisco [California] and Berkeley [California], I discovered this thing called a solo show, where you wrote shows about stuff you knew. And so I never wanted to do it 'cause I didn't really, you know, I didn't--it never occurred to me to talk about being a mom in a solo show. But going to Europe was an eye-opener, and so when I came back, I (laughter), I wrote, I wrote about the Anne Frank House [Amsterdam, the Netherlands], you know, 'cause it just, it blew me away. I mean it, I was in the Anne Frank House. I saw it, you know, I, I touched those walls, and I wanted to tell somebody (laughter). I wanted to tell somebody what I'd seen and what happened to me and how it affected me. And I thought what am I gonna do? I said, oh, oh, and I start playing with this idea of Fontaine, you know, who was really, really smart and really brilliant who happened to be a dope fiend, you know. So being able to talk about--and I hate flying. So just being able to talk about being on that plane and how they come with the (laughter), with the cart, you know, was heaven for me. And then talking about the things that, that you know because you're talking to people about abortion issues in the Catholic church and all of these things. And I thought, how can I explain to people that this is like nobody, this is a hard decision. It's a terrible thing to have to decide, that you can't. And so if you go to people, you must be able to communicate with the person who's saying, I need your help. So that's how the, the surfer girl came about because I had been very lucky. I had my mom [Emma Harris Johnson], you know, and I could go to her, and she said, no, this isn't a good time for this, what to do. And so we made that decision, but we made it together, but I had lots of friends who didn't, whose families put them out in the street, you know, I mean, kicked them out in the street, you know. Then I, I love this crazy commercial, Come back to Jamaica, that used to be on. I loved this commercial 'cause the guy was just, you know, he'd be walking and I thought what would be fun to do, and I, I--in my mind, wrote this, the piece about the Jamaican lady because black folks kind of get a bum rap all the time (laugher), you know. And I just wanted to do something fun. And I love the Old Raisin because he just made me laugh--every time I thought about what would he look like, the descriptions got greater and greater and more fun. And so there were about five other people that I, that I sort of created. And at one point, we had a, a piece about slipping in and out of places, you know. And somebody said, "Maybe you don't wanna let people know that. Maybe you don't wanna, let the state department [U.S. Department of State] know that you were doing that." I said "Oh, okay." So I took that out. Story_ID: 526292 Speaker 1: But I started to create these characters and, you know, run them and, and do them, and, you know, three, four years later, I got an invitation to come home to, to 17th Street [sic. 19th Street] to Dance Theater Workshop [New York Live Arts, New York, New York] because they were doing this crop of solos shows. And someone had written David White who was the guy that was running it, written him about me. So he sent an invitation, said, we can pay for your, you know, pay for you to get here, but you're gonna have to find a place to stay. And I said, "Well, where are you located?" I say. He said, "Oh, we're on 17th Street" (laughter). I was like, I'm from 26th [Street] and 10th [Avenue]. I'll be there 'cause I could stay with my mom [Emma Harris Johnson]. So I--my mother said, "You're what, you're coming back, what?" (Laughter) "What happened?" I said, "I got an invitation to do my show ['The Spook Show,' Whoopi Goldberg] there." And she was like, "Well, that'll be interesting, that'll be fun, right?" I said, "Yeah." And so, it brought me, it brought me back. Story_ID: 526293 Speaker 1: In the interim, my daughter and I are driving around in our Volkswagen van, which weighs, you know, like tissue paper. So when the wind blows, you know, you're hold it, sliding around. And she and I were going to buy--I'd gotten some money for my birthday and we were going to buy her shoes. And we had NPR [National Public Radio] on, I think, and we turned it on and heard this woman doing this reading. And it was just amazing. And, you know, I'm driving and I'm listening, and I say to Alex [Alex Martin], "This is kind of amazing story, huh?" She says, "Can we listen to it?" I was like, "Yeah, should we pull over?" She said, "Yeah, yeah, let's pull--." So we pulled over. And it was Alice [Alice Walker] doing a partial reading of 'The Color Purple' [Alice Walker]. And so (laughter), Alex said, "Can we, can we get this book? Can we buy the book?" I said, "Well, we're going to buy shoes." She said, "Can we do both?" I said, "I don't know, I don't know, I don't know if we can." So we didn't get the shoes that she said that she wanted, that I saved for her to get. We got shoes that she wasn't really that interested in, and we got 'The Color Purple.' So we read it, she and I read it together. And when it was done, I, I just, you know, I wrote a letter to the, to the back of the book, the, you know, they tell you where the offices are. So I wrote a, wrote a letter to Alice Walker. I said, my name is [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg, and I work in Berkeley, California, and this is what I do, and here's some of my work, 'cause I'd been doing Moms Mabley. I--all these different shows that, you know, 'cause you're trying to hone your skills. And, you know, I've never made a movie before, but if they ever make a movie of this, I'd be happy to play the dirt on the floor. Whoopi Goldberg. So now, I get this invitation, you know, weeks later to come and I--oh, and I say, I'm going to New York [New York]. I, I--yes, I think I'm cheeky enough to say I'm, I'm going to New York, and this is where I'm gonna be staying and, 'cause I just assumed she would write me back 'cause that's hubris. You don't, you have no idea. And so I got to 288 - 10th Avenue, and my mother [Emma Harris Johnson] said, "Oh, this came for you," and she, she handed me this purple envelope. And I said, "Who's this from?" And it said, Alice Walker (laughter). I went, "It says Alice Walker, Ma." She says, "Is that the, the lady that wrote the book?" I said, "Yeah." She said, "Well, what does it say?" I opened it up. It says, Dear Whoopi, I know your work. I live up in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]. I've seen your shows. I've already sent your stuff to the powers that be. [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones is producing it. So and so is producing it, and, you know, maybe they will let you be dirt on the floor. So that's how that happened. Story_ID: 526294 Speaker 1: I do my show ['The Spook Show,' Whoopi Goldberg] (laughter), and I'm like this, I'm kind of crazy (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But your show is, you show is fair--okay. Speaker 1: Not yet, not yet because remember I've just gotten to DTW [Dance Theater Workshop; New York Live Arts, New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: All right. So now, I--the first three days, there's nobody at the show. Nobody comes, and I'm, I'm saying to David [David White], I'm really sorry. I'm just really sorry. I'm so sorry, I'm sorry, sorry. And then the next day, Bette Midler shows up, and I recognize her. I know her. And I do my show, and, and she just says, "You are really terrific." And I was, thank you, thank you, you too, my God, it's Bette Midler. And then Barbara Barrie shows up a couple of days later. Barbara Barrie was an actress who did a, a movie called--shit, what is it? It'll come to me. She's, she's in an interracial relationship, black--I don't know what it's called. I'll look it up and find out. And I know her because she's also a fine actor, and she just says, you're really good. Now, that Thursday, an article comes (laughter) out in The New York Times (laughter), that says, you gotta see this, this person. She's--you're not gonna believe it. Her name is [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg. Don't let that throw you. She's not gonna look anything like you think she's gonna look. You need to run, do not walk to see this show. And it--written by Mel Gussow. And he could--if he had been my boyfriend, he couldn't have written a better review. I mean that--it was stunning, I mean stunning. And that night (laughter), line around the corner, lines around the corner for the next three or four weeks. Story_ID: 526295 Speaker 1: Culminating with my mother [Emma Harris Johnson] coming in, closing the door and saying, "Now, I don't want you to be uncomfortable. But I have to tell you, Mike Nichols is here." I said, "What, what?" She said, "Mike Nichols is here." And we, in the room, go, "Oh, my god" (screaming) (laughter), 'cause my mom was a movie buff. She loved movies. Her grandma loved movies. They--we're all movie fans. So I do my show ['The Spook Show,' Whoopi Goldberg], I do--I, I, I can't--I don't see him 'cause I don't see people when I'm working. I don't see them in the audience. So I come in, and she said, "Did you spot him?" I said, "No, I didn't," say, "I don't know." I said, "He's probably not gonna come back. I don't know, I don't know, oh, my god." (Knocks) We hear. And I opened the door, and the guy says, "Whoopi [HistoryMaker Whoopi Goldberg], this is Mr. Nichols. He'd like to speak to you." And he's standing there, and he's got tears in his eyes. And he comes in, and I say, "Oh, my God, I love you. Oh, my God, you worked with Elizabeth Taylor, oh, my God. You did this movie, you did that. It was you." He said, "Well, let me tell you a, a little story. I was on the last boat out of Germany, and so your talking about Anne Frank took me to a whole other place." He said, "Would you ever wanna come to New York [New York] and do the show on Broadway?" And I was like, "Huh? (Laughter) What do you mean?" He said, "Well, I'd like to produce this on Broadway." And I say, "Okay, sure." So we exchanged numbers and everything, and I, I kept doing my show. And then the run was over, and I, I went home. A month into being home and being back, the phone rings and this is what I hear. "Ms. Goldberg." I said, "Hello." He said, "It's Mr. Nichols." I was like, "Hey, how you doing?" He said, "Have you given any more thought to coming to Broadway?" I said, "Oh, you were ser- (laughter), you were serious (laughter). I thought you were kidding." He said, "Oh, no, no. I would like to produce the show on Broadway." I said, "But what, you know, I could really suck, I could really be terrible." And he said, "Have you sucked before?" I said, "Yeah." He said, "Well, it won't be a problem, will it? Let's get some dates." And I was like, "Okay." So I, of course, lost my mind, danced around the room, and preparing to go. We're all--you know, my daughter's [Alex Martin] gonna stay, she's got Dave [David Schein] there and her life doesn't get interrupted. She gets to go to school and do all the stuff. And came the time to go and do it, and people were just a little different, dealing with me a little differently. And I couldn't quite figure out what it was. And about two or three months in, Dave said, "I can't do it. You have to come back." I was like, "I, I can't. I committed to this time." He said, "Well, you have to come back. I can't do this anymore." I said, "Really? I, I, I--oh." And I had to have a conversation with myself. And I called my mom, and that's when I said, "Can you go to California for me 'cause I need some help." And so she dropped everything, locked up the apartment and, and went to California. And my friends got very mad at me. They assumed that I was gonna change and so they changed. And so nobody was talking to me. So-- Speaker 2: They got mad at you because of-- Speaker 1: Because things were starting (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) what was gonna be-- Speaker 1: --to happen. Speaker 2: And he would--that was hard for him too, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Now, we're best buds now, and I just discovered something recently that my daughter said. She said, "Do you know that Dave used to come every day and cook me breakfast and get me to school?" I said, "No, I didn't know that. I didn't know that." I said, "He wouldn't talk to me, so I had no way of knowing." Story_ID: 526296 Speaker 1: You know, everything has to change and stuff, but then, I'm finished with the show ['The Spook Show,' Whoopi Goldberg], and now, I have to sort of deal with coming back. In the interim, I get a call--'cause I have now acquired an agent who says to me, by the--a manager, he says to me, "By the way, Steven Spielberg can't get to New York [New York] to see the show. He wants you to come to Amblin [Amblin Entertainment, Universal City, California]" which was his place at Universal [Universal Studios Inc., Universal City, California], "and he wants you to do the show at his little, at--he has a theater in there." And I was like, well, okay, 'cause I wanna be in 'Raiders of the Lost Ark,' I wanna do that, sure, hell, yeah, I--sure I'll go do that. And they say to me, "Look, we know some of the stuff you've done. Just stick to the show. Don't do any extra stuff." I said, "Well, okay, I won't. I mean I'm not gonna embarrass myself, but--." So I get there, and I meet him. And I'm--before I'm doing the show. And I was like, this is really a great opportunity for me. And he says, "Well, part of the reason I wanted to see it is because I'm gonna be directing 'The Color Purple.'" I said, "Oh, okay. (Laughter) Okay." And he said, "And so I just wanted to, I just wanted to see you, see you do your thing." And I was like, okay. And he said, "I think you would be really good as Celie." I said, "Ah, really? That's kind of a big, that's big. I've never done a movie. That's really big." And, of course, I say the same thing I say to everybody. You know, I can really suck, like I can really be bad. And he said what Mike [Mike Nichols] said, "Have you sucked before?" I say, "Yes." And he said, "Well, if I see that you're sucking, I'll fix it." I said, "Ah, can I do the--I, I need to do the other part, the Sofia part. I know I don't look like Sofia, but I could really do that." He said, "No, I'm not--I don't think, but, you know, let me think about it." Story_ID: 526297 Speaker 1: So now, we, (laughter) we go in, and it's time to do the show ['The Spook Show,' Whoopi Goldberg], and I'm backstage, and like I peek out and (laughter) my mouth hits the floor because I peek out, and there's Ashford and Simpson [Nickolas Ashford and HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson], there's [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones, there's Michael Jackson (laughter). There're all these people, and I'm like this, "Oh, no." So I go out, and I do my show. They're laughing. They're having fun. They're digging it, and I'm done, and they say encore. I say, "Well, I have one, one more piece, but I've been advised not to do it." And Steven [Steven Spielberg] said, "Why were you advised not to do it?" I said, "Well, because it, it has a little something to do with 'ET.'" He said, "Yeah?" I said, "Yes, I call it Bleetee [ph.]." He said, "What is it about?" I said, "Well, it's kind of about what would happen if ET landed in Oakland [California]" (laughter). He said, "I want to see this." So, I say, "Okay" (laughter). I did one, you know, I don't--I, I, you know, and now, I'm thinking, ah, man, this is the wrong thing to be doing. But I think, okay, but I, I told him what it was. He said, he wanted to see it, so I do Bleetee. Now, the manager is over on the side, and he is sweating bullets. He's really annoyed with me, and ET is about these kids in the projects who, while going down the street, see this little guy. They think it's a little brother. They think it's a brother (laughter). So they figure, well, he's just, you know, his mom is somewhere. Maybe she's on the corner. Nobody knows. So they take him home to their house. So he's with them, and he can't phone home because the phone don't work, the phones don't work in Oakland. And he lives with them, and he gets--he evolves with them. He gets a jheri curl. He starts wearing, you know, he starts running women. He, you know. And it's a lot longer than I'm telling it, but he starts running women and running guns and stuff. And his people come to get him, and he sees them in his powder blues, and his jheri curl, and he mows them down with his automatic rifle. And it's, and the--at the end, I say, you know, it's all about assimilation. You have to know that wherever you've come from, you have to know who you were so you don't kill off anybody that could possibly get you back to your roots. He's on the floor, Steven's on the floor. He's laughing. He's emotional. He said, "This was, this--I can't even tell you how great this piece was." So I said, "Okay." Story_ID: 526298 Speaker 1: And so I come in the next day, and he [Steven Spielberg] said, "I wanna talk to you about--I, I decided I would like you to play Celie [in 'The Color Purple']. I would like you to play Celie." And I was like, "Ah, man, I, I don't know if I can." And he said, "No, no, it's all right." I said, "I've never done a movie. I don't know how to act for movies." He said, "That's why I'm here. I'll help 'cause, you know, I'm a director. I can help you with this." I was like, "Okay," and then [HistoryMaker] Quincy Jones came in (laughter). And I was like, "Hi, Hi," you know, and it just--they, they talked to me in such a way that it made me feel like I would be okay. And then I went home for a year 'cause it took them that long. So I would read, you know, you know, Tina Turner is gonna be playing Celie, and I called Quincy and said, "Is that--you changed your mind on me, did you?" He said, "No, stop reading the newspaper." Then you'd see, Diana Ross is gonna be playing Celie. "Really, how's it--and am I still?" "Yes, it's still your part, it's still your part." So there were like five or six of those where people would say, so and so is gonna be playing Celie, and I'd call them. And they'd say, no, no. And then they said, we're starting principal photography next month, and this is where you have to be. And walking, getting people to fit me with clothes and trying to figure out how this all worked 'cause I'd never seen--I'd never been on, I, I mean to me, it was fascinating. So now, I've got on these clothes, and I'm sitting at a, at the juke joint table, and there was a little light that is there that you can't see, that is there just for me. And I kept trying to move it, and I said, "Is this here?" I says (laughter) to the guy, "Is this here for a reason 'cause I keep trying to pull it off." He said, "No, no, no, no, don't move it (laughter), that's your light." I said, "Why do I--you have lights on." He said, "No, no. That light's just for you." And the, the man who was the DP [director of photography] was called Allen Daviau. He said, "What you--if you're gonna do this for a living, you have to know this light is called, you--this is your light, and I'm putting a little gel on it to warm it up so it's just a really lovely color on you." And I said, "Is it gonna look yellow?" He said, "No, no, you, I think you'll like it when you see it." So they shot it and did everything. And the next day we went to see the rushes, and he said, "Now, you see that, see how warm your face looks?" I said, "Yeah." He said, "That was that little thing I put in there." I was like, oh, my goodness. He said, "So I'm gonna teach you about gels." And then Steven said to me, "These guys, all these guys behind the camera, they've been doing this a very long time. So if they have a suggestion for you, hear what they're saying. If they're telling you, you need to turn this way, you know, it's okay if they tell--they know what they're doing. They, they have forgotten more than you will ever know." I was like, okay. So--and how to treat a crew, and how to be on a set, you know, 'cause I would be like, oh, my God, 'cause you look out the window, and you think, where did all those purple flowers come from? Yesterday, it was a old--it was a, a cornfield, and they--and then I got there earlier. And I saw them lift these buckets out, and said, oh, that's how they do it and how they make the food. I mean I was just, I was in hog heaven. And it was, it was great, and Steven, who is dyslexic like myself, is also another movie fanatic. And he started talking to me in movie terminology, like he would say, "Remember that shot when Scout [Jean Louise "Scout" Finch] is standing in front of the door where Boo Radley is. Boo Radley is behind the door," said, "Yeah, yeah." "So you remember when the door opens quick, and there's Robert De Nir- Robert Duvall, and you see his face," and he said, "That's, that's what I want. That's the feel I want." So he would say, "You know, remember in 'The Graduate,' when this happened, that's the feel I want." Said, "Okay," 'cause I could do that 'cause I understood--I, I, I knew exactly what he was talking about. So it was a great time for me. It was a great, great, great, great time. Yeah. Story_ID: 526299 Speaker 1: Just to go back a little bit, I--how were you developing your material? You said you were writing. And I, 'cause this is a jump, this is a-- Speaker 2: I--no, it's what--when you realize that you have--you can create your own show. I, it never occurred to me. No one ever said, hey, you can write a one-person show. I didn't know. So I thought, you know--and all of the Hawkeyes [Blake Street Hawkeyes] had been doing this for, you know, years. They had been writing their own things. And I was, well, I don't really know anything, so I thought how can I tell--I wanna tell this story, but how, what can--how can I tell it a way that it's gonna be fun for me to do? You know, so and talking about, you know, Fontaine, all the things that Fontaine is. Nobody knows if it's true. They don't know this story. Only I know it, and I can tell it any way I want to. Every night I can tell it different, as long as the core of what I wanna talk about is there. So that, that was a great thing for me because once I was able to do that, I could write shows monthly. I could do, you know, I could combine a show if I wanted to. So I just kind of created characters that I could then go to the Old Globe [Old Globe Theatre, San Diego, California] and audition with because how are they gonna know it's not from some play. I say, you know, I'm--my name is such and such and such. And I'll reading from Poocah, Poocah, Poocah-Moocah, by Poopa Poopa. They don't know the difference. So it's like, oh, I don't know that show. So I go, yeah, it's pretty, pretty obscure. I wrote the show (laughter). That's why you don't know the show. But they could see I could act. That was the thing for me. Speaker 1: I, it's just that, you know, improvisation is the basis of a lot of theater--but you're, I mean the show ['The Spook Show,' Whoopi Goldberg] is a brilliant show. Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah (simultaneous) Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was watching it this morning. And it's a brilliant--it's got a lot of texture to it, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of nuance, you know. It's, it's--and it, you know, it--I understood it because I could con- I controlled it. So I wasn't under the thumb of anyone but myself. And once, you know, once--so Mike [Mike Nichols] and I are rehearsing. I'm rehearsing, and I hear, (sigh), and I look, and I say, "Is everything okay?" (Laughter) 'Cause I'm, I'm just performing my ass off, say, "Everything okay?" "Yes," he says, "It's--everything's fine." I said, "No, no. I can hear something, something's in your head. What's the matter?" He said, "Is there an end to this story? Or are you just talking?" I said, "Well, there's an end, but it's possible that I might have just been running my mouth." He said, "You hit the end about eight minutes ago. You need to listen to what you're doing." Speaker 1: Who's this saying this? Speaker 2: Mike Nichols, yeah. It's like, okay, yes, you're right (laughter), you're right. Story_ID: 526300 Speaker 1: And so all of these things come into play when I go to make this movie ['The Color Purple'], that I'm making sort of with some duress 'cause I'm trying to figure out what to do with my daughter [Alex Martin], you know, because now I need my mom [Emma Harris Johnson] to come and stay 'cause he [David Schein] can't do it. So, you know, and then everybody's sort of, was like, oh, this is what you are. This is, you're the new thing. You're the new thing. And I got to go places I always wanted to go to. I got to take my mother everywhere she ever wanted to go, openings, and we got to go to the Academy Awards [Oscars]. I mean things that she and I watched on television--my brother [Clyde Johnson] too, things that we watched, we got to become part of. And so for me, when I, you know, really sort of look back on it, I had a conversation once with my daughter where I explained to her what I was gonna do. I had the opportunity when she was, maybe nine. And I explained it all to her, and she's like, "Okay." And then she was very upset the whole time because the truth of the matter is, when you're eight, you have no idea what they're talking about, what the adults are talking about. And I knew that if I didn't do this, this opportunity was never gonna come again. And so she--our relationship was kind of odd and interesting. And then, you know, she grew up, fourteen, got pregnant. I said, my God, what are we gonna do? My mother said, "What does she wanna do?" I said, "She wants to have the baby." I said, "She can't do that. She can't do that." And my mother said, "Why not?" I said, "Because she's fourteen." She said, "Oh, I'm sorry, Caryn [HistoryMaker Whoopi Goldberg]. I understand." I said, "Now, what do you mean you understand?" She said, "Well, all those times you're marching for choice, you're marching for your own choice. You're not marching for everyone's choice, you're marching for your choice. I just need to know--I just needed to know that that was the case. But I think we can do this because if this is what she says she wants to do, we can do this together." So we did. And now that girl [Amarah Skye] is twenty-seven and married to a very nice boy, and she has a three-year old daughter [Charli Rose], who is very bizarre and funny. And I have three grandchildren, three grandchildren, yes, and a great-grandchild. And my life has been really good. It's--it's hard to be in the, in the forefront sometimes. It's hard to say what you think because, you know, in this day and age, it's much harder 'cause you have people with their camera, and people with their phones. And nobody checks facts and nobody looks. But I've had, you know, I have a good career. I've had, I've made fifty-some odd movies. My mom's gone. That's been hard. My brother's gone. That's been hard. But I have my family. Speaker 2: And your brother just died. Speaker 1: He just passed, yeah. And no one said to my brother and I, hey, you need to get yourselves checked for an aneurysm because your mom just went from one. So we never checked, and, of course, that's what he went from. Story_ID: 526301 Speaker 1: I look, and I think I'm no longer the hottest kid on the block. I'm no longer the youngest thing in the room (laughter), which is really annoying sometimes 'cause as it turns out, I actually am the youngest thing in the room, the youngest thinking thing in the room. And there's a lot of people in line, and it's their turn. And so I--we do different things now. We produce things. I do 'The View.' I'm gonna direct this movie about Emmett Till, going to--yes. Speaker 2: You're directing the movie, that Debra's [HistoryMaker Debra Martin Chase] doing, Debra told me she's doing? Speaker 1: Oh, I don't know what Debra's doing. I'm, no, no. There are suddenly four hundred-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. She's not, she's not (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay. No, no, but I'm doing that. We have a show on a network called Oxygen, which is called 'Strut' about the first transgender modeling agency. We have one coming up for CTW. I think it's--CMT, sorry, about a, a girl doctor who doesn't know who she is or who she wants to be, but she gonna find out real quick 'cause stuff is coming up. We have another piece for Bravo called[AB1] Harlem, which I put together years and years and years ago for two gentlemen who are now way too old to do it. But--'cause you know we've come back en vogue where black people are very en vogue right now. So we're doing that. And I have a, a children's animated show for Amazon [Amazon.com, Inc.] based on my children's books, the 'Sugar Plum Ballerinas' [Nancy Cato and Whoopi Goldberg] which is about a whole bunch of little girls, some who want to be coders, some who want to be chefs, some who want to be all these different things, but their mothers insisted that they go to ballet class 'cause they didn't get to be ballerinas. And so it's all about the adventures of these little girls and how they hang out because we never see little girls of color. And they're of various colors. So it's kind of wonderful. So stuff's happening. It's all good. And I'm very, very lucky. Story_ID: 526302 Speaker 1: I wanna go back. I mean you had overnight--I, I can't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It feels like over--yeah. Speaker 1: I can't say it was because you were ges- you were gestating for like a decade maybe. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: But how are you handling the overnight success, and-- Speaker 2: I'm fine with it. Oh, my God, I was so happy 'cause-- Speaker 1: But that's a lot of the--that's a lot--I mean you're talking about a major Broadway-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --one person show ['The Spook Show,' Whoopi Goldberg]. Speaker 2: Yeah, I got a lot of attention (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then that leads-- Speaker 2: I had my mom [Emma Harris Johnson], I had my mom with me. We went every--I'm telling you, we went everywhere. Suddenly, we were most popular people we knew. People would invite us out. People who stopped talking to my mother years before, suddenly were friends with her again (laughter), friendly with her again. So it was, you know, I, I had great people. I had my mother. I had Mike [Mike Nichols], Paul Simon and I were friends. And he said, "I want you to remember something. You need to have as good a time as you can with all of this," he said, "because Artie [Art Garfunkel] and I didn't have a good time. We didn't know we were supposed to have fun. So you have a good time and don't let people tell you, you shouldn't be going to see things you've never seen before, going places you've never gone--go have fun." And I took him at his word. And the first nasty thing ever written about me was because I went to lots of things. And someone wrote, oh, she's so desperate she'll go to the opening of an envelope. And it was like, I don't know what that means quite, but clearly, you're not from the projects. You have no idea. And that's when I began to realize, oh, okay, so I'm, I'm no longer the golden child, you know, 'cause when I made, you know, 'Jumping Jack Flash' ['Jumpin' Jack Flash'] or I went and did 'Burglar,' and you're, you're squandering your talents. Like, well, it's not like people are rushing at me with scripts, so I'm taking work because I like being an actor. So all those movies, you know, I think three of them were specifically written for me, 'Color Purple' ['The Color Purple'] and 'Kingdom Come' and something else (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, 'Color Purple' just seems to have destiny all over it, in some respects. But not everyone can go from--I mean 'Color Purple' was a serious dramatic piece. Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'm an actor, and you're supposed to be able to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you're as much a comedian. Speaker 2: Yes, but you're supposed to be able to do all of it. And I, I am, and was. Story_ID: 526303 Speaker 1: It's time to go. But I--the truth of the matter is you, you got, you got the best part. The best part (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: No, no, no, you did. And let me tell you why, because it's the, the stories of my mom [Emma Harris Johnson]-- Speaker 2: Are not out there. Speaker 1: They're not out there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And that's what I--that's really what I want, why I wanted to do this because she--without her, I don't know what would have happened. But she, she knew what she did--she knew what hadn't been done for her, as a weird kid. And so she did it for me. Story_ID: 526304 Speaker 1: Can I ask her one question? Can I ask her a legacy question? Speaker 2: Legacy, yes. Tell me what that is, yes. Speaker 1: Well, I wanna know what you want your legacy to be? There's only one [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg. I don't even know--there's only one you (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, there is only one me. Listen, I don't know about my legacy, but I want people to be able to say about me is she's fairly decent person who stood up for what she believed in. She was funny and annoying, and she gave a shit. That's my legacy. That's what I'm hoping for. My family is my legacy. There's a lot of them. I had one child [Alex Martin]. She had three (laughter). Of those three, there's another one. So I'm looking at the future, and sort of waving--and I honor them every day, but I miss them. I miss them tremendously. Speaker 1: They're where? They're-- Speaker 2: Oh, they're--the family's in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], yeah. Speaker 1: They're (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're there. But I miss my mom [Emma Harris Johnson], and my brother [Clyde Johnson]. Story_ID: 526305 Speaker 1: Were there things that you're most proud of and things that you regret? Speaker 2: I only have one regret (laughter). Actually, I have two regrets. They are this. Sammy Davis, Jr. became a friend of mine, and I really loved him 'cause there was nobody like him. I mean performer, crazy, wonderfully funny. And he invited me to his birthday. And I'm really not a comfortable person. I'm really not comfortable, so I hemmed and hawed and hemmed and hawed, and I, I just thought, I can't do it. It's gonna be a lot of people there. I don't know, really wanna--how to deal with it. And then he died the next month, and it devastated me, devastated me because I should have gone. And the other one is a movie ['Theodore Rex'] I made (laughter) about me and a talking Tyrannosaurus Rex. Those are my two regrets in life, nothing else do I regret, nothing. Everything brought me here to you. Speaker 1: Thank you. Speaker 2: Thank you. Speaker 1: Most proud of? It was regrets and--yeah, thank you, thank you. Speaker 2: Yeah, the things I'm most proud of, I'm most proud of my family. I'm most proud of living my life the way I wanna live it. Speaker 1: But what about your work? Is there one of-- Speaker 2: All of it. I mean, my God, look at me. I was never supposed to be anybody's movie star, ever. And I seem to have some endurance because they love me still in Europe. They love me in Korea, they love me in Switzerland. They, you know, I mean people say come back to the movies. And I say, well, eventually, I will. But it's not my turn yet. I gotta wait for it to come back around. So I'm proud to--I'm proud that I'm living to where I, I think is good for me...