 Story_ID: 156227 Speaker 1: My name is Denise Gines, and I am the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Scott Stearns is the videographer. And, Tony Poole [Anthony Poole] is an interviewer observing. How are you today? Speaker 2: Fantastic. Speaker 1: Would you please state your name and spell it for me including any middle name? Speaker 2: My name is James Allen Hill. And, Allen is A-L-L-E-N, Hill H-I-L-L. Speaker 1: And, your date of birth? Speaker 2: Nine--September 14, 1949. Speaker 1: And, where were you born? Speaker 2: I was born at Provident Hospital here in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. And, today's date? Speaker 2: Today's date is August 19, 2013. Speaker 1: And, the location of this interview? Speaker 2: At The HistoryMaker[s] office here on Chicago, in the South Loop. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm an orthopaedic surgeon. Story_ID: 156228 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you five People magazine-ish type questions. Okay? What is your favorite food? Speaker 2: I have to say two things: fried catfish and fried chicken. Speaker 1: And, your favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year, once again, I guess I'm always kind of mixed. My favorite time of the year is spring and fall. Speaker 1: Okay. And, where do you like to vacation? Speaker 2: I like staycations, which means, I like to stay at home and do the things I like to do, that I never get around to at home. And, visit some of the things--there's still, even though I was born and raised and have lived in Chicago [Illinois], all except one year, there's things in Chicago that I still haven't done. Speaker 1: Okay. And, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yes. I get up every morning and I pray. And, I pray to God for five things. Peace and not anger, faith and not skepticism, hope and not despair, joy and not sadness, and love and not hate. Speaker 1: Okay. Wonderful. Well, thank you. Story_ID: 156229 Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna begin with talking about your family. And, I would like to start with your mother and her side of the family. Tell me your mother's name and where she was born, and where she grew up. Speaker 2: My mother's name was Doretha Lowe, and she grew up around Bolton, Mississippi, which is really a small, you know, one block town 'bout fifty miles, thirty to fifty miles from Jackson [Mississippi]. It's between Jackson and Vicksburg [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay. And, did she tell, share any stories with you about her growing up? Speaker 2: Her, she was born out of wedlock, and she was actually raised by her grandmother [Rose Lee McCraven (ph.)]. I mean, she knew her father, and she knew her mother. But, she was really raised by her grandmother and kinda initially shunned by her mother. And, she ultimately met my dad [James Hill, Sr.] in the same area, and got married when they both thought about migrating to Chicago [Illinois]. And, actually her parents had already moved to Chicago, meaning her biological father, and her biological mother. And, so, there was always a contentious relationship, especially with her mother, because she felt like her mother had abandoned her when she was younger. And, then all of a sudden, she was married in Chicago and then she wanted to act like she was her mother. Speaker 1: I see. Okay. Okay. And, so, one thing, can you spell your mother's first name for me? Speaker 2: Doretha D-O-R-E-T-H-E--A. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And, what about your mother's schooling? Speaker 2: My--I'm less clear on that. She went to grammar school, and I--she started high school. But, I don't, I really don't know; she never mentioned whether she actually graduated from high school. I know she went, but she had to work, you know, because her grandmother who was raising her was older. And, they didn't have a lot. It's not like they--there was no comment about a man being in the house. And, so, I think she had to work fairly--when she was younger. And, I'm don't--I'm not sure if she actually graduated from high school. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know what type of work she did? Speaker 2: You know, at that point in time, you're talking about late '20s [1920s], early '30s [1930s], [Great] Depression, I'm sure she was doing household chores, working out in the fields, 'cause they were sharecroppers. And, so, I'm sure it's just manual jobs that uneducated blacks in the South could do. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 156230 Speaker 1: And, and tell me about your grandmother [Rose Lee McCraven (ph.)]. Did you know her? Speaker 2: I don't know her. I only know her--like I said, my mom [Doretha Lowe Hill] had such an unhappy childhood. She really didn't spend a lot of time telling us the specifics. Other than she really was unhappy with--she felt like her childhood was--she was glad to be an adult. 'Cause she felt like she was--I didn't get the feeling that she was physically abused, but psychology abused and shunned by her parents. And, I think that's the scar even, she carried to the grave with her. Speaker 1: Okay. And, so, you, do you know your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What is her name? Speaker 2: Rosa Lee McCraven [ph.]. Speaker 1: Okay. And, so, and you said there was no man in, so, you didn't know your grandfather? Speaker 2: Yeah. I did, I'm saying she was born out of wedlock and both of 'em had already migrated to Chicago [Illinois] and were married to other people. But, they were here in Chicago when my mother came. Speaker 1: Okay. I guess I'm talking about the gran--not your mother's and father's, your--okay, I'm--let's step back a little bit. Your mother's mother, did she have a--her,--that would be your grandfather. What was his--? Speaker 2: You mean, my step-grandfather? 'Cause like I said, she was born out of wedlock. And, I knew her biological father, and her biological mother. Speaker 1: Right. So, we're talking about who she grew up with. Your mother, who your mother grew up with, is her mother, is your grandmother? Speaker 2: Right. I don't remember, as I stated before, I don't remember a man being in the house. She never commented-- Speaker 1: That's, that's what I was--okay--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: She never commented about a male being in the house. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, fine. Speaker 2: But, like I said, she didn't spend a lot of time embellishing us about her background because she was very unhappy about it. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Story_ID: 156231 Speaker 1: All right. So, let's talk about your dad. Tell me his name. Speaker 2: Actually, I never use it except when people find out about it, but really, I'm a junior. You know, if you look at my birth certificate even though everything legally, I just put James Allen Hill on. If you look at my birth certificate, I'm actually James Allen Hill, Jr. So, my father is James Allen Hill. Speaker 1: Okay. And, where was he born? Speaker 2: He was born in the same area. Speaker 1: Same area. Okay. Speaker 2: That's where they met, Bolton, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. And, do you have any stories about him? Speaker 2: Yes. 'Cause, I mean, when I was growing up--had tons of stories, because every summer we used to go down and visit my grandparents [Charlie Hill (ph.) and Alberta Hill (ph.)] and all. He was the only one of his three siblings that migrated North. The--at least one of 'em spent time North. And, his father even in the '40s [1940s] came up and worked; worked at the stockyards for a period of time to get the money to buy the land that he ultimately owned. 'Cause before then, he used to rent land and basically a sharecropper. And, he actually came to Chicago [Illinois] and worked several years, leaving his, leaving my grandmother and the kids there so he could actually get the money to buy his land. So, I have a rich memory 'cause every summer, you know, from when I can remember to actually age thirteen, we'd spend the summer down in Bolton. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 156232 Speaker 1: Well, let's, let's talk about your grandfather and then we'll come back to your father [James Hill, Sr.]. But, what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Charlie Hill [ph.]. Speaker 1: Charlie Hill. Okay. And, tell me more about your relationship with your grandfather. Speaker 2: I didn't realize it until I've done some personal exploration in, to my genealogy, that he was actually the eighth child of nine kids. He was my great, and this comes into play now, 'cause it explains something. My great, great, I think, great-grandmother on my father's side was a full-blooded Choctaw Indian. And, the reason I said, "Explain something now," is that I got a little facial hair on my chin. But, I've actually never owned a razor, and I've never shaved. And, if you notice, American Indians aren't very hairy people. And, I think, that's probably a--something I got from that, that heritage. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My grandfather was fair-skinned. And, it's actually, once again, I've been fortunate. Hopefully, it'll come out in the interview is that, going back, especially on my father's side, even though I mentioned my mother's [Doretha Lowe Hill] history, there were always two parents in the household. I didn't come from a situation where it was a single parent. So, my father who was the only one of three kids, was raised by both his parents, who were very influential. And, I was raised by two parents. And, so, I've never had some of the legacy, which I think it's a legacy of slavery, where I came from a family with--from a one parent situation. So, I got to spend a lot of time with my grandparents. My grandfather was a very hard worker, as I mentioned. He actually, came North, worked at the stockyards during the [Great] Depression to get enough money to buy the land, and he went back to be a farmer. Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And, what was your grandmother's name? Speaker 2: Alberta Hill [ph.]. And, I was just looking to see--Alberta E. Hill (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. And, what do you remember about your grandmother? Speaker 2: She was an ex-school teacher. She was short, dark-skinned, and as I mentioned, he was fairly, he was fairly light-skinned if you talk about (unclear). But, she was kind of short, kind of wide. Where he was kind of six foot [6'0"] and wiry. And, she was a school teacher. And, she was a domestic CEO. She was fairly--in the house, she was dominant. She, she set the rules, and she was not a very flexible person. But, it's one of those things that was tough love. I mean, she was not a warm fuzzy person by nature. But, you go down there, she cook the best biscuits. She would, you know, she would, she was--I don't appre--I didn't appreciate it until I was much older to understand. 'Cause, you know, you try to avoid somebody that was gonna be a strict disciplinarian when you're seven and you're always a little bit mischievous, like I was. But, as later on, I appreciated the way she expressed the love. And, the fact that she did set limits. Speaker 1: Okay. And, so, you mentioned that she was a school teacher. So, tell me about your grandmother and grandfather's education. Speaker 2: I don't think my grandfather, I don't know how far but, once again, I think, he probably started high school. But, then, once again, they were sharecroppers in a sense "they rented the land." But, they really were sharecroppers and actually in their area--I was recently there. And, they still have the "store" where the white person that was dominant in that area, where they had to buy their feed and everything else from. It's actually still there, and he still owns the majority of the land in that area. His family does, at least. And, so, I think, he had to work fairly early, 'cause he came from a large family. And, I'm not sure how far he went. It's interesting, going back in the genealogy, my grandmother--father was a minister. And, his father had been a minister. So, they came from what would probably be considered a middle-class family in that area. And, she was from a small family. She actually only had three other, two other siblings. It was the three of 'em. So, I'm sure being a minister from a small family, she was able to complete high school. But, I don't think she really--you know, at that time, you're talking about the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s], you know, way before Brown vs. [Board of Education of] Topeka, Kansas [1954]. It was definitely separate and unequal. And, I'm sure, you know, somebody with just a high school education was "the teacher for the black kids," because, they weren't funded in any way, and by any means. Story_ID: 156233 Speaker 1: My grandmother's maiden name was Alberta E. Jackson [ph]. Speaker 2: Okay. And so, who were her parents? Speaker 1: Allen [Jackson] [ph.] and Maggie Jackson [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay. And, then on from there. Speaker 1: And, my father's [James Hill, Sr.] parents was--actually, now that I'm looking back on it, his dad [Charlie Hill (ph.)] was a minister too. And, actually the minister in the area that they lived in, which initially was, his name was Reverend Benny Hill [ph.]. And, his wife was named Liza Hill [ph.]. Speaker 2: Okay. Any further back? Speaker 1: No. I don't know-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: --the names of people. I mean, it's present but I must admit, I haven't documented the names (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Not a problem. Not a problem. Story_ID: 156234 Speaker 1: You said that your grandfather [Charlie Hill (ph.)] came north to earn money so that he can purchase the land that they lived on. Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: And, when did he purchase that land? Speaker 2: He purchased it in 1927. Speaker 1: Okay. And, you were telling me recently that you now acquired the land. Tell me about that. Speaker 2: Well, when my grandmother [Alberta Hill (ph.)] who passed away after my grandfather, prior to her passing away, they--my dad [James Hill, Sr.] had three other siblings. And, she--and some first cousins that they actually raised from my dad's sister. And, they actually, she got pregnant during high school. So, they actually raised them, so they considered them their kids. So, they divided the land up into four parts. And, ultimately, I acquired my father's 25 percent of the land, including the house that my grandfather actually built. He actually built his own house and the house is probably, he built it, he started building it in the early '30s [1930s]. And, I recently went down there [Bolton, Mississippi] and the house is still the same. 'Cause, like I said, I remember going down there as a five year old, and now I'm almost sixty-four. The house is--somebody actually lives in it, and the house looks exactly same as I remember. And, so, the house is over eighty years old. Speaker 1: Right. Well, you said that you, that is memory for you. Describe the house for me. Speaker 2: Actually, I have a picture of it 'cause one of my cousin's is a artist. And, he actually, one of the family reunions did a picture of it, which I have hanging up in my home, family room. And, anyway, so, I actually look at fairly frequently. Even though I don't get there. And, what it was, it's right off a fork, and it used to be back then dirt roads, dirt roads. And, it--there's a big kinda gravel front area, there's no grass in it. It's just a gravel front area where cars and trucks would park. And, then there's kind of a small fence with maybe ten feet of dirt. That's really dirt, there's nothing really groomed grass or anything. It is mainly gravel. And, then there's a big screen porch. And, then when you go in, off to the left of the hallway right when you get in was kind of a living room area. Off to the right was a bedroom. Then--if you go down further, there was a kitchen off to the left behind the living room area. And, kind of a utility area next to there where, like, people used to, when I was a little kid, they used to put, boil water. And, had this big tin tube where everybody would, you know, 'cause we worked in the field during the day. So, in the evening, everybody would take a bath in this big tin tube that everybody would use the same water. I could remember that vividly. And, then there was a back porch, where they had a chicken coop, the outhouse, 'cause they didn't have an indoor toilet at that time. And, they had an area, basically a barn where they would store, like, the tractors and the farm equipment that he used to take care of his land. Speaker 1: And, how many bedrooms were there? Speaker 2: I think it was just two. Speaker 1: Two bedrooms. Okay. Okay. Speaker 2: And really that second bedroom was more of a utility room with a bed in it. 'Cause it served as a--as where we took our baths. Where we, you know, where they stored stuff, and then it just happened to have a bed in it. Story_ID: 156235 Speaker 1: So, now let's talk about you at an early age. And, we just talked about one of your earliest childhood memories, about going south each year. But, do you have another childhood memory that you can think of? Your earliest childhood memory. Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory. Oh, I got a lot of 'em. But, one that still 'til this day is relevant, is the fact that here in Chicago [Illinois] they had a big fire around Christmas time at a Catholic school [Our Lady of the Angels School, December 1, 1958], there was really in a Polish neighborhood. As you know, the demographics of Chicago, Chicago is probably the historically been the most segregated housing city in the United States. So, they had a Catholic school that was in a predominately Polish area. And, I think, it was week or so before Christmas, they had a horrific fire where--and, we had shortly before then got the old black and white TV. And, you could--they started running it on the news and you could see the house--the thing burning down. And, you could see the kids jumping out of the window. You could see them bringing out bodies on TV and, I think, at that point I was eight or nine years old. And, I sat there and watched it on TV and I said right then that I wanted to be a physician. 'Cause they showed all these kids at a morgue and they showed Cook County Hospital [later, John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], 'cause at that time that's where they took a lot of 'em. And, I was so impacted by the visual picture of that that I internally, and externally, I think, I told my parents [Doretha Lowe Hill and James Hill, Sr.] then. And, they kinda thought I was just having a childhood moment like being a cowboy or a fireman kinda moment. But, I said, I was gonna be a physician. And, lo and behold as the twist and turns that life goes, I've been fortunate. I'm one of the few people that I can honestly say have lived their dream from being a little kid. So, that's one thing I remember is, 'cause that was impactful enough that even though I twist and turns of life and you don't really know where your roads gonna lend--end. Really my vision at that point of where it was gonna go to, actually came true. Story_ID: 156236 Speaker 1: You know, there's movies coming out like now, I didn't see it, but my wife [Sandra Hill] was telling me about 'The Butler.' When I was out of town, she went to see it. And, I can remember vividly like as I mentioned going down south every summer and staying for long period time. Couple things, one is that when we got there, we could not leave the house. You know, our first cousin, as I mentioned, would go to the store and buy, you know, sodas as they would call it, which we call pops in Chicago [Illinois], or candy. We could never go. We had to stay there with our grandmother [Alberta Hill (ph.)]. We could never go. And, this was just a store that was down a half a mile away. I don't think I ever remember except driving through Bolton [Mississippi] ever stopping in the town. And, this was, you know, a few years after Emmett Till when we started going down. And, Money, Mississippi is not that far from Bolton. And, so, in retrospect it was, we--they never even mentioned why they never would take us, you know. We were a little jealous 'cause we had to stay--I have some other siblings, and we had to stay there with our grandmother. And, everybody else would leave. And, so, it wasn't 'til years later, I figured out that they didn't want us to go because, you know, we weren't accustomed to all the culture back then. We're not accustomed, and a matter fact, if some white person would come to the door, they would push us out to the back yard, or to the back of the house so we'd never come in contact with them. And, I know, in retrospect it had to do with the fact, and they've had, they did even--I know I'm digressing a little bit, but they had had crosses burned in their front lawn and other things. And, I'm sure in retrospect it was that they were afraid that we weren't gonna show "the proper deference of the time," and create a situation where we're gonna--we were gonna be at risk. So, what they did is, they intentionally avoided us having any contact with anybody that was white when we were down there. And, we would be there for several months. So, it was fairly obvious to us to why they kept doing this. But, they never would explain why they kept doing it. And it's--the other thing I would remember is driving down there. My father [James Hill, Sr.], you know, was a factory worker, you know, in the initial migration up to Chicago. And, so he would, you know, he lived in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois]. He would always have a new car. It was one of those situations that every two years, or every year, everybody was getting a new car. So, he always had a car. And, so, when we went, we drove down there. And, I always would wonder why, number one, when we would stop at a gas station, he had to, he said, he would lock the car door and say, "Stay in the car." And, then he would go into the back door of the gas station to pay for the gas. Kinda like this recent Jackie Robinson movie. And, then if we had to go to the washroom, he would say, "Y'all just wait here." And, then we would get to somewhere down the road and then he would let us out of the car and then we would do whatever we had to do on the side of the road. And, he would always make sure we had fried chicken, which was one of my favorite meals, then we ate. But, we never stopped to eat. We would always use the washroom on the side of the road. And, he would always go into the back door of the gas station. And, you know, one again, when you're a kid, you could see the difference of these two stories I just mentioned about going south, relative to our lifestyle in Chicago. But, you didn't really question it, 'cause you knew you were in a different world. And, all you wanted to do as a kid is play with your first cousins and see your grand, grandparents. And, you know, your parents would just kinda protect you. But, you really didn't--you were always scratching your head 'cause they really would come out and say why they did what they did. And, even though you didn't understand, you just kinda accepted that, especially your parents, that they knew what was best. And, it was such a minor thing 'cause you were so excited about going down there, that you didn't make a big deal about it. But, in retrospect, now I understand some of the reasons some of the things occurred. Story_ID: 156237 Speaker 1: So, let's now talk about your life in Chicago [Illinois]. But, first let's set the stage where your mother [Doretha Lowe Hill] and father [James Hill, Sr.], they meet, and they marry. Was there a story about their marriage? Speaker 2: Well, they met down in Bolton [Mississippi]. That's why they were from the same area. And, when they--my dad, during the war, his brother went to serve in the, you know, World War--Korean War [sic]. His brother went to the [U.S.] Military for two years; his older brother. He didn't wanna go to the Military, nor did his parent [Alberta Hill (ph.) and Charlie Hill (ph.)]. So, he ended up, 'excuse me, he ended up working for Campbell Soup [Company] in upstate New York, in some kind of packing plant during the war. So, he got his first exposure, and he never wanted to stay in Mississippi. His siblings stayed, but, he, he never wanted to stay. So, he worked for a while in upstate New York and got the flavor of going North. And, you know, as you know, there's a, it's a quota to black migration. And, he came up in the late '20s [1920s]. Well, the '30s [1930s]. I don't know exactly when, sometime in the mid-'30s [1930s] he--mid-'30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s]. I think it was, I think, let me correct that, it was the '40s [1940s] 'cause I was born a year or two after he came. So, it had to be the mid-'40s [1940s] he came up to Chicago, and he moved in about--what was it, the Weise Hotel [ph.]. He moved into the near south area here, in Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois], and got a job. And, then, once he got a job and got established, he called for my mother and I think they got married here. But, it was one of those things like I did. He got married at [Chicago] City Hall and went to work that night. It was not a formalized marriage. But, they had had a relationship and he would just call for her once he got established here. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 156238 Speaker 1: And, so, tell me about your siblings. Speaker 2: I have four siblings. One of which has passed on. I'm actually the eldest. Speaker 1: Oh, list them for me in order and where you fit in. Speaker 2: Okay. As I mentioned, I'm the eldest. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My second brother who was a year younger than I am, has passed on. His name is Ricardo Hill--was Ricardo Hill. He's still alive as far as I'm concerned. But, he's not here in body. My third sibling is Charles Hill, which is kind of goes back to kind of an immediate family name. My grandfather was Charlie [Hill]. My dad's [James Hill, Sr.] older brother is Charles. And, my third brother is also named Charles. And, he's, I don't know exactly but, I think, about four years younger than I am. And, then my younger brother is name Kendall, which is a year younger than Charles. And, then two years younger than, two to three years younger than--let me correct that. 'Cause now, I think, it's about four years younger than my youngest brother is my sister, who was Felicia. The reason I know that is she just made a big deal about turning fifty. And, I know my other brother's fifty-four. So, four years younger is my, the baby which is my sister. And, her name's Felicia. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We call her Cheryl [ph.] though. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 156239 Speaker 1: So, tell me about the neighborhood in which you lived with your parents [Doretha Lowe Hill and James Hill, Sr.] and your siblings. Speaker 2: Apparently, and I don't know how long, but when I was, I was born here in Chicago [Illinois] as I previously mentioned. But, initially, they lived on, it's like 32nd [Street] and Phillips [Avenue] on the South Side. When I was very young, when things like, what's that, that famous movie, Lansberry [sic, Lorraine Hansberry], I forget the name of it, 'Raisin in the Sun.' So, when that kinda era came and there was a white flight and blacks started moving out of the contained area of Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois], or the near South Side, my dad bought a house on the West Side. It was at--the West Side of Chicago when they, when blacks started moving out of the restricted area that they were in, in the '40s [1940s]. And, so, sometime in the '50s [1950s], 'cause I went to school there. I think I was five or so. He, he bought a house. 'Cause I even remember, we had white neighbors then. This is--they had not completed moved out of the West Side of Chicago when my dad bought the hi--house. And, so, I grew up in that house. I went to school on the West Side of Chicago. And, my dad when he passed away still had, which was only a couple years ago, still lived in the same house. Story_ID: 156240 Speaker 1: So, from the South Side, what's the difference between the South Side and the West Side of Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: It's a big difference. It's a, I mean, you know, actually, Chicagoans when you say you're from Chicago and an African American is also from Chicago, they're next questions is, is "Are you from the South Side or West Side?" There're two distinct areas. And, actually, like I mentioned, if you look at the history of Chicago's African Americans initially they restricted--actually, it's inter--real interesting, they usually they define Chicago by the Chicago Fire [1871]. And, there were African Americans here during that period of time, but they were just south of the river. So, they weren't really affected by the Chicago Fire. But, they were in a restricted area that they could live, they only lived in. And, it created, if you've read the Richard Wright, "a difficult situation," 'cause they were in a closed area. Once things started getting somewhat liberalized then people moved either further south or they went to the West Side of Chicago. Story_ID: 156241 Speaker 1: Okay. So, as you were saying, your, your dad [James Hill, Sr.] lived on the West Side [of Chicago, Illinois]. So, from moving from the South Side to the West Side, and this is where you went to school. So, let's talk about elementary school. Where did you go to elementary school? Speaker 2: I went to a school called [Jacob] Beidler Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois]. And, it's interesting as a tidbit, and I'm into trivia, as you hopefully tell by now. I actually, lived two doors away from the great-grand person who the school was named after. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, who happened to be a very prominent member of Chicago [Illinois] white society, and that's why they named the school after him. And, now I actually live two doors away from the grand-person of the school that I went to was named after. Story_ID: 156242 Speaker 1: So, now tell me about the neighborhood that, you went to elementary school [Jacob Beidler Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] there and since you're talking about who was your neighbor, tell me about the rest of the neighborhood. Like, let's do a square block all the way around. Tell me what you see in your neighborhood. From your house, where were the stores? Who owned the stores? Your neighbors and your friends. Speaker 2: Okay. You know, during elementary school, I must admit, my world consisted of maybe ten square blocks. And, I never, you there was border north, that you couldn't pass, 'cause it was all white. And, there was a border east and west that were different gangs lived in, which is still a problem to this day, that you didn't go. And, then kind of the expressway was the border south. So, there was like a ten block area that I lived my whole grammar school life in. And, you know, every once and a while, we'd get on the L [elevated train] and go downtown. But, things like going to Wrigley Fields [sic, Wrigley Field], where the [Chicago] Cubs play, that was, we didn't go to that, Wrigley Fields. I mean, we, it was a big event for us to just go window shopping maybe every two or three times a year downtown. Or, we didn't have air conditioning and my father [James Hill, Sr.] worked a second shift a lot. And, what he would do is come home maybe ten or eleven and we would--packed us up in the car and he would get a blanket. And, we would go either to Navy Pier, and actually sleep outside all night, because it was too hot to stay inside. Or, actually interestingly enough, another location he would take us when it was real hot, was the airport. And, he would just park in these free lots and we would actually sleep in the car with the windows down, because it was just to stifling hot to be in the house. So, other than those areas where he would drive us away from the ten blocks. But, if we were independent walking around, my world was ten blocks and it was down from what is a conserva--one of the major flower conservatories here. It's called Garfield Park Conservatory [Chicago, Illinois]. And, it was a high school, a woman's high school, public school, a block away. There were tons of playgrounds around. And, Madison Avenue [sic, Madison Street, Chicago, Illinois] which is a big deal down south, prior to the [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] riots [1968], was a, were all the stores were located, you know. And, usually owned by Jewish merchants at the time I grew up. Matter of fact, right--half a block from my high school--grammar school, which is three blocks away, I used to work in the evening at a drug store. You know, when they had the old counters and worked for a Jewish guy. And, that's where I made my extra money. Matter fact, right across from the drug store was a, I forget the name of it, it was a blues place where Howlin' Wolf and Muddy Waters, and all those, so I--walking home I would hear all these great blues things that people talk about today. When they talk about the history of blues they would play, and I didn't real--you know, nobody realized how famous they were gonna become in mainstream now. Which I could just hear 'em every, every night walking from work playing at this storefront. Story_ID: 156243 Speaker 1: Who were your friends in the neighborhood? Did you have friends in your neighborhood? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me who they were. Speaker 2: They were usually, well, I had a fair number of friends. And, kids who--I played--couple of things. There was a Boys Club [later Boys & Girls Clubs of America] who actually did a lot for me 'cause they exposed me to a greater world. 'Cause we went on day trips sometimes. I went to the--when I didn't go for long periods of time down South, I was in their summer camp. And, so, I spent a lot of time--and actually, they had college students coming down from Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] which would mentor us. And, one of the reason ultimately I went to undergrad was Northwestern. 'Cause I had gotten exposed to Northwestern through the mentoring program at the Boys Club. So, but, I spent a lot of time, you know, little league baseball, you know. I had friends that were immediately on the block and then I had friends from this ten block area where we would, you know, play bask--baseball and basketball at a Boys Club. So, outside of working at, even during grammar school, I spent a lot of time at the Boys Club. Speaker 1: Okay. Who were some of your friends; their names? Speaker 2: Two doors away was a guy by the name of Reginald Hanks [ph.]. What's Michael's [ph.] last name? A guy by the name of Michael. I had I--Clifton Cooper [ph.] was somebody who actually always stands on my mind. 'Cause I was actually--I'm a lousy dancer, and a lousy athlete, and I, and I'm not physically endowed. So, if you talked about a basketball team or a baseball team, and actually prior basketball being so prominent when I was growing up, you know, Jackie Robinson, and baseball with Ernie Banks, and Billy Williams, you know, NBA [National Basketball Association] wasn't a big a deal then. So, actually, baseball was really much more what kids were playing than what's the modern day kids approach to trying to be the next Michael Jordan or LeBron [James]. And, I was a lousy athlete. I mean, I couldn't hit a ball. I couldn't do anything. And, so, the reason Clifton Cooper who was still around, stands out in my mind is he was a superb athlete. You know, he did great in track. He did--and he would always make sure that I was picked to play on a team. And, so, he was very--a dear friend. Speaker 1: And, so, you had white friends as well as black friends? Speaker 2: When I was real young. 'Cause two doors away, there was a white family with kids the same age. And, actually it's interesting, I have very vivid memories that even--they had no prob--they ultimately moved out fairly quickly during this migration period. But, the parents had no problem with us interacting and playing. I mean, we didn't spend a lot of time going in and having cookies and milk with them. But, they had no problem with their kids playing us on the outside, and they didn't treat us any differently. And, I'm sure, you know, with the flight and the fear and worrying about things, that they ultimately moved out fairly quickly after the black migration started to move in for fear, you know, about the prevailing myths and concerns at that time. But, on a one-to-one basis and that's what, and I know I'm gonna use a big term, as I'm always stuck with, cognitive dissonance. Which means that you could have two feelings that totally opposite. And, once you realize 'em, you don't really act on 'em. But, personally, you feel uncomfortable. And, so, I didn't feel racism at all from them in the '50s [1950s]. But, you know, in a bigger picture, they were racist, and that's why they moved out. Story_ID: 156244 Speaker 1: Tell me about, about the [Jacob Beidler] Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois]. Who were the stu- were there white students going to that school when you started there? Or, or no? Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. They were starting to move out the neighborhood then. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, so, I really didn't have a lot of interact--by the time we started moving in is when people started moving. And, that was actually another motivator for them to get out quickly is the school system they wanted to change. And, so, they--which some of the problems now where the school system dictates the population of the neighborhood. But, anyway, so one of the reasons the white flight was because of the school system. So, I don't have a lot of memories of, at least in my class, and I think there were one or two that ended up graduating at eight grade. But, there was not a prominent number of Caucasians in the class. But, I do have some very vivid memories, or instance, at that time there were two dominate gangs in the Chicagoland [Illinois] area. They were on the South Side. They was the Blackstone Rangers [later Black P. Stone Nation], and on the West Side was the Vice Lords [The Almighty Vice Lord Nation], and there's been a lot written and talked about. And, the older guys that actually ran the Vice Lords lived about a block away. And, one of the reasons myself or none of my siblings had any problems, and even my father [James Hill, Sr.] as I mentioned, died living in the same house, was never accosted, never had to worry about anything physically is that, I remember vividly, one day when one of the administrators or mayors was cracking down on the gangs and gang violence; do what they did now, they did a sweep of the school. And, one of the members of my class happened to be the son of the leader of the Vice Lords, which was thousands and thousands of people. And, he actually had a gun in school. And, we're talking about, like I said, in the '50s [1950s]. And, so, they started to do a sweep. And, I was the kinda of teacher's pet. So, I had a desk that was right next to the teacher. 'Cause like I said, I wasn't physically endowed. But, I was smart enough to realize that I better use my brain 'cause I'm not physically endowed. So, at school I was an excellent student. And, so, because of that the teachers always, you know, were more, how can--they tended to me 'cause they knew I was a sponge and I was gonna soak up knowledge and I wasn't just there to occupy a seat. And, so, when they found out the sweep was gonna come, I was there and the guy went by and he took the gun out and put it inside of my desk. And, he then walked away. 'Cause he had been in Audy Home [Juvenile Temporary Detention Center, Chicago, Illinois] and he had been on probation. And, he knew if they found him with a gun in school that he was gonna go, you know, to do larger time. And, so, me being my normal scary self, and I took some of that from my dad. But, anyway, being my normal scary self, of course, did not say anything. And, of course, when they did come into our room, they looked in his desk because of his track record. And, they kind of scanned around the room. But, you know, the teacher was sitting right next to me. And, the teacher was talking and they took it that, you know, this little guy who, you know, is dressed like he's a poindexter was not gonna be, you know--people didn't wear their pants around their ankle then. But, you know, they did have attire, and they didn't have hoodies then, but they did have attire that you can kinda tell if somebody was a gang member versus somebody who was kind of a poindexter studious kind of individual. So, they picked up the verbal cues that I was not the type that was gonna be doing any gang related activity. So, they never looked in my desk. The kid, the kid actually then, of course, came back and got his gun after they left (laughter) (unclear) thing. And, afterwards he told his father and the older gang members what I had done. 'Cause they knew, like I said, he was--if they had found him, he was gonna go do some time in the Audy Home. And, so, because of that, they put it out on the street that don't mess with this family. And, so, it's interesting, they would come down the street, thousands of 'em as a short force, or go over to a playground and take everybody's ball (unclear). But, if we were there, it's like, don't--there was--we were untouchable. And, so, I never had to, even growing up, have any fear. Like some of the violence that's happened here in Chicago, because that one act myself and the rest of my family never, you know, I would say, in fifty years, it's--well, sixty years ever had to worry about somebody from the neighborhood robbing us, or sticking us up or any, any violence. Speaker 1: Wow, that's, that's amazing. So, you were protected (laughter). You had protection, huh? Story_ID: 156245 Speaker 1: Now, you were talking about your teachers in school and we're talking about [Jacob Beidler] Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] now. And, you, you know, shared that, that you already knew you wanted to be a physician by this time. So, tell me about the teachers and who might have been influential at that time? And, we're just talking about elementary school. Speaker 2: It started, her name started with a P. I can't, I don't know if it was Peabody [ph.]; it's something with a P, and she was somebody that kind of took me under their wing. 'Cause like I said, they picked up fairly early that I was gonna be somebody that was teachable versus other kids that were just there to spend a few hours as a daycare center and go home. And, so, she spent a lot of time preparing me, and as I'll get to later, I ended up taking an exam and going to a special high school because I had, she had given me enough knowledge. Also, one of the traits, which I still have today, is I always kind of fight the grain. And, so, there was one guy almost didn't graduate from high school, I mean, grammar school and it's because there was one of the teachers that was kind of abusive and I stood up to 'em. And, he--his vow was that he wasn't gonna, not let me graduate and it had nothing to do academics. It had to do with, I questioned his authority and it was correct. And, he got reprimanded. And, so, then he decided to take, Mr. O'Banion [ph.], I remember his name. He started to actually make it so that I wouldn't be able to graduate. He couldn't stop me from graduating but he was not gonna let me go to the ceremony, graduating ceremony. Story_ID: 156246 Speaker 1: In [Jacob Beidler] Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois], what were your favorite subjects? Speaker 2: My favorite subjects was science and math. And, actually, the only thing I don't remember getting a A on is spelling. I was never a good--I wasn't, until this day, I didn't learn phonetics. So, everything I have to do, you know, they didn't teach phonetics in my grammar school background. So, everything, pronounce words, I have to do it by repetition. I really have a time trying to read the Bible. 'Cause some of those words, some of those names and things, if you don't know phonetics, you're not in the game at all. And, if I don't hear it two or three times, and repeat it, I can't phonetically get a new word and then learn it. And, so, everybody always gets on me, even to this day, that I don't do well with names 'cause I--phonetics is not something that's in my background. Story_ID: 156247 Speaker 1: So, now, thinking back at, during that time, we're still in [Jacob Beidler] Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois]. What are some of the sounds and sights and smells that would take you back to that time? Speaker 2: Well, my grammar school was right behind the L [elevated train]. The Chicago [Illinois] L, well, subway. And, it's above ground. And, so, I vividly remember, you know, during the classroom the teacher having to talk--stop talking or the student if they're answering questions, stop talking. 'Cause the sound of the L coming through the back. And, so, you know, you--it's kind of funny, you remember being taught in time segments. 'Cause have to almost time when the L is gonna come by. And, so, when that L's coming by, and that was actually an L stop right behind the high school. So, when the L would come and stop and start, well, you know, departing and people and embarking from it, you--that noise sometimes would cause you to stop. Especially, in the summer when you had the windows open. And, so, I remember that. I remember listening, there was a church across the street, and listen to the church bells, you know, at a certain time of day. So, those are kind of my memories of school, was the sounds. Speaker 1: Okay. But, just even in the community, what smells remind you of that time? Speaker 2: Well, it gets back to, you asking me earlier about my favorite time of year. I can remember the smell of how smog--fall smells, and that's why fall is one of my favorite times of year. 'Cause it has a distinct smell with the leaves changing and also that first chilly day. The air even changes; smells differently. So, waking up in the morning going to school when the sun's not quite up, 'cause the days have gotten shorter and coming out in that chill and smelling--that has a very distinct smell. And, because of the pollution, I don't smell it as much now. But, I remember distinctly the smell of fall. Speaker 1: And, what about any sights that remind you of that time? Speaker 2: I guess the sights were historically in that area, there were boulevards with these old limestone houses. You know, it's different than architecture of the East Coast. And, once again, I'm trivia buff, and one of the unique things about Chicago is because of the Chicago Fire [1871], the architecture is totally different than older cities on the East Coast. And, so, it used to be these fairly large mansions on the boulevards that were in my neighborhood. That actually went to a lot of disrepair because people moved out of the neighborhood and they just abandoned them. And, so, I remember these huge, which some are still present and now being gentrified, these huge old mansions with the limestone and walking past them and kind of enjoying how unique each one of 'em were. Story_ID: 156248 Speaker 1: You have siblings at home and family traditions. Can you tell me about something that might be unique to your family? Maybe during the holidays. Did y'all have a special tradition or anything that you did in your family setting? Speaker 2: I mean, I (laughter), I'm laughing 'cause if you say special tradition was looking forward to a, my mother [Doretha Lowe Hill] making banana puddin'. That was kind of the specialty for desserts. On holidays, we always had banana puddin'. So, I would always look forward to, and she would do it sometimes, other times a year, but every holiday. And, that was really our favorite dessert, and it was really the vanilla wafers that were even the best. 'Cause she would actually, you could get it now here, but they have more pudding and less wafer. She had more wafers and less pudding (laughter). So, I used to love that. Always because I had two parents and my dad [James Hill, Sr.] really, I can remember having, you know, when he couldn't pay his bills, pawning his suits and stuff like that. He was always kind of on the edge. Even 'til, even until he passed away, he was, his--he never planned for the future. So, he would live from paycheck to paycheck. And, so, but he always made sure on the holidays that we always had a big meal; whether it be Thanksgiving, whether it be Christmas, whether it be Easter. Or, on Easter, he always made sure we got some new clothes. And, so, I remember that. And, lastly, a tradition is that every Christmas, for some reason he would get in his mind that he'd have to do something. So, he would ether paint a room, or take a room apart. And, actually, I remember my grandmother [Alberta Hill (ph.)] coming one Christmas and told him to sit down and stop, and he would never finish. So, we we'd be in the middle of Christmas and he'd be hammering, or he be painting and the room be, and the house would be half tore up. And, my mother would be mad because on Christmas Day the house was still half tore up, 'cause he would never finish. And, he couldn't afford to pay somebody so he had to do it his self. And, so, that was always a tradition as what kind of project was he gonna leave unfinished on Christmas. Story_ID: 156249 Speaker 1: What church did you--your family attend? Speaker 2: It was, I remember getting baptized. It was a Baptist church and I, I forget the exact name of it, which was across from our grammar school [Jacob Beidler Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. My, my dad [James Hill, Sr.] wasn't much of a churchgoer. Actually, in later life, prior to him passing, he was hardcore. But, when I was growing up, you know, he was working two jobs and actually if he had a Sunday morning that he could actually get some sleep, he would actually sleep (laughter). But, my mother [Doretha Lowe Hill] would take us to church and it was a Baptist church. And, she took us more in retrospect for the exposure. She really wasn't your typical church lady that used that as a disciplinary tool or had this thought that everything was gonna be better in heaven. But, I think, in retrospect, she took us just to have us exposed and give us an idea--an ethical framework to work out. But, she wasn't super religious. Story_ID: 156250 Speaker 1: Well, let's go back to you as a student or, well, you're still a child, so, you alluded earlier that you were kind of rambunctious or mischievous in a way. Speaker 2: Very. Speaker 1: (Laughter) And, tell me why do you, why do you say that? What did you do that would-- Speaker 2: I'll give you a story. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: One of the residuals that I haven't really gone into yet, of our mother's [Doretha Lowe Hill]--I think parts genetic and part of our mental that I understand now, is "my mother would have nervous breakdowns." And, my--I--in retrospect, my dad [James Hill, Sr.] might have had many flaws. But, one of his sterling things is that when my mother got sick, he would always make sure she got taken care of and he would never shun his responsibility to us or to her. And, so, when my mother would "have a nervous breakdown," and have to be hospitalized and have to have shock treatments, electrical shock treatments, some family member would have to stay with us. 'Cause we were young and he was working two jobs. So, either her sister would come from the South or his mother's half-sister, or actually his sister would come from the South. His brother's wife would come up, or ultimately his mother's half-sister moved upstairs in the house we lived in. It was a, it was "a single family dwelling," but there's stairs up. And, one of my father's projects that he ultimately did commit--complete, even though it wasn't on time, was he turned the second floor, even though there was one doorway in, to kind of a separate living area with a kitchen, bathroom, living room, the whole bit. And, so, ultimately, and I think he did it because of income. You know, we didn't need the space or we could, you know, we could all sleep in one bed until my sister was along. But, that ended up being an area he could rent out and make him some income. So, my grandmother's half sister and her husband migrated from the South, then they moved upstairs. So, one of the times my mother got sick and was hospitalized with a "nervous breakdown," until somebody came up from the South to take care of us, my--I guess you would call, I don't know what you call her, half grandmother. I mean, half, I guess she was an aunt would take care of us. And, she was built like my, that I described my grandmother [Alberta Hill (ph.)] but even shorter. She was probably about 4'6" and prob-she's actually still alive, still 4'6', 'cause she's in her nineties. And, she was much more rigid and authorial then even I described my grandmother. And, so, she wasn't, actually, even 'til this day, we revere and like her. But, at that point in time, she was not somebody that was, she wasn't kid friendly (laughter). And, like I said, I was a very mischievous kid and actually one of the downsides is most adults, you know, when I got near ten or eleven, I could kinda outsmart, you know. And, I was never one, even to this day, to lack confidence. You know, even--and that has helped me professionally as I never felt that I was any worse or better than anybody else. And, I never let color or what people thought of me define my actions. Story_ID: 156251 Speaker 1: And, so, anyway, she [Hill's great-aunt, Lottie (ph.)], she was just being unreasonable. So, and probably she was reasonable. But, to me she was unreasonable at that time for whatever she was telling us to do. And, so, I wrote this long note calling her a big fat pink elephant. You know, and it was, you know, that's, you know, that's a big insult when your nine or ten years old, that you get this written note saying that we disagree, you're not right, and you're a big fat pink elephant. So, of course, me being mischievous, I get my other brother to give her--and I didn't sign the letter. You know, I gave it to him and I say, "Give this to Aunt Lottie [ph.]." He didn't know what he was giving her, of course. And, he gave it to her. And, she read it, and she was livid. 'Cause she was doing by dad [James Hill, Sr.] a favor so he could work. And, there we were disrespecting her, calling her a big pink elephant. And, so, my dad gets home and she is just livid. And, so, of course, my dad is tired, 'cause he done worked two jobs. And, that's one of the things he would do, is every once in a while when we--when he had to discipline us, or felt he had to discipline us, yet he didn't do it frequently 'cause he was too tire most of the time. When he did, he kinda whooped you for an hour based on things you did two years ago. And, he still remember that. He'd go--as he's whooping you, he's going through this whole list of what you done did two years ago. And, you, you're sitting there as a nine year old, say, "Why are you giving a whopping for something I did nine months ago?" But, he remembered vividly so he would, when he did whoop you, it was major event. So, then he got home and had, he was just tired, frustrated, as most people in his situation at that point in time. And he had--one of his jobs was being a cab driver. And, I'm sure there was a lot of times he was disrespected and abused in his job. And, so, he came home and she told him this and he just went ballistic. He put all my other brothers in the tub, got an extension cord and started from one end of the tub to the other. He didn't, he didn't tell 'em he was gonna whoop 'em until they got all their clothes off and got in the bath tub. Then, he got the, and he, and he, okay, he didn't think I was involved. And, so, I didn't get a whooping, 'cause the other brother had given her the note. It was unsigned, and all of them, except my younger brother, who was too young to be involved. The other two got a, got a whooping and he was chasing them all over the house, they was running (laughter). It was a scene to behold. And, I'm sitting there, sitting on a chair and they was getting, you know, they was getting beat up so bad, they--even though they could say, "Naw, I didn't do it, I wrote the letter." He was hearing nothing. He had already just lost it. And, so, afterwards, you know, he--after he had beat 'em until his own fatigue, I, I said, "I did it." But, he was then too tired to give me a whooping. And, so, to this day, I think they still mad at me, 'cause they got a bad whooping and they didn't even do anything (laughter). Story_ID: 156252 Speaker 1: Now, this was through your elementary years, and you went from first through eighth grade. There was no junior high school, correct? Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: Okay. And, you were telling me off-camera about a reunion that you were gonna have. Was that for your elementary [Jacob Beidler Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me about that. Speaker 2: Well, a few years back, and I forget the year of the class, but there were gonna, they were thinking about, I guess it was the class of '67 [1967]. So, that would've been maybe the fifty years reunion of the grammar school class. And, they were thinking about having--a few of the people are having a reunion. They starting trying to contact people and they realized that maybe out of thirty, forty people, they were probably two, three black males that they could contact. And, I think it's a residual of Vietnam [War], drugs, criminal things and violence in the neighborhood. As I mentioned, there were a lot of gang activity. That's not a new activity today. And, because of that, there weren't a whole lot of males left. And, so, they aborted having the reunion because of that. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And, sometimes I feel like, through the grace of God I've been blessed. But, I also am living the life for probably forty other people that aren't, aren't blessed enough to have a fortunate life like I've had. Story_ID: 156253 Speaker 1: All right, well, let's go on then to high school. Now, you talk about being a very good student through your elementary years. And, the teachers, you know, knew that you were a sponge and you were soaking up all of the information to I guess be a straight A student. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. And, so, when it came to going to high school, tell me about the high school you went to, and how you became about going to that school? Speaker 2: During the period as I as ending my grammar school career, the neighborhood high school, which was called Marshall [Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I'd spent some time interacting, you know, getting--'cause, the teachers realized that I was number one, not only trying to get more knowledge, I was actually smart enough to retain it and pursue it. And, so, I'd interacted with some of the high school teachers, as a grammar school student. Which is kind of unusual at that time. And, so, they suggested to my parents [Doretha Lowe Hill and James Hill, Sr.] that there were two, before this whole charter school kind of phenomenal, you're talking about the '63 [1963] is when I started high school. And, you know, before civil rights even, there were in Chicago [Illinois], Madison Street divided it up into two high school which were public schools but they had closed enrollment. And, actually Madison which is the zero line in Chicago was the boundary. Anybody that lived south of Madison could go to Lindblom [Technical High School, later Robert Lindblom Math & Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois] which was a technical high school, which was college prep, which you had to pass an exam. And, anybody north of Madison could go to Lane Tech[nical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois], which is technical school, which if you saw it to this day, looks like a college campus when you're on it. And, these are the schools that were built in the '30s [1930s]. Lane Tech, and to give you an idea, it was all boys then. Both of these schools were all boys, and there were five thousand students, 'cause they took it from the whole--half of the city and the other school took for the other half. But, you had to pass an exam to get in. And, so, you know, because of my, like I said, as side light I kinda did it 'cause I wasn't a good athlete. So, I had to be good in something. So, I knew I could be good in school. And, so, I took the exam, with their encouragement, and I passed it, and got in. Which created a little bit of a dilemma, 'cause in my class there were 1,200 students, and there were three blacks. I was one of three. And, also I lived closed to Madison, as I mentioned, that was the southern border of the neighborhood. It was an hour and two buses to get there. It was not, you know, it was on the North Side of Chicago. And, so it was not logistically close. And, so, and I had to go through white areas. Remember I mentioned the northern border of my ten blocks was like a boulevard and, which was maybe two blocks away from where I lived. That if you're black, you didn't venture up there. So, I had to actually, two blocks away, get on a bus, right--the block where I lived, and a block away I was in a totally white area that was not very accepting of blacks. 'Cause they had made that their border because of train, you know, a train route and a boulevard that they weren't gonna allow blacks to live north of that area. So, my dad [James Hill, Sr.], especially based on his southern experience, was initially adamantly opposed. You know, he could see danger, you know, 'cause you're talking about the early '60s [1960s] before civil rights, and me going to a school that's, you're talking about five thousand whites and three blacks. And, so, that to him was not gonna be--that was like gasoline and a match. That was not, to him, not gonna end well. And, once again, me being innately--my idea of agrarian, that I thought I was just as good as somebody else, to me that didn't make any sense to not got to a school just 'cause I was black. That didn't, that didn't, and I didn't even rationalize it, it just to me that was such a foreign concept that I should worry about going there 'cause I was black. I was just as good they are. I passed the exam like they passed it. And, so, I started fighting with my dad at that point. And, like I said, if I felt strongly about something I would not back down. And, so, he realized how adamant I was to it, and he basically rather than getting into a battle with me, asked my mother [Doretha Lowe Hill] what she thought. And, you know, even though he was--he worked hard and had his own ideas, he actually worked hard because he made sure my mother never worked. So, I had a mother that was there 24/7. I didn't have mother that was a domestic, and I won't get into that, but, his sister and other people were domestics in the South. And, if you--like the help. And what they did is they end up neglecting their own kids, taking care of these white kids. And, when he came, he was the rebel that went north. One of his convictions was is that he wanted his wife to be a full-time mother and not work outside of the home. And, so, at that point in time, even though he had fear about society and me being at risk, she was the one that was there all the time. Story_ID: 156254 Speaker 1: And, so, he [Hill's father, James Hill, Sr.]--because me and him bucked heads on it, he said, "Okay. I'm gonna let your mother [Doretha Lowe Hill] decide." And, so, he backed--and I'll get into it later, but he act--there was another instance that was major; like, me getting married, that he adamantly opposed and wouldn't go. But, he let my mother, 'cause I got married when I was nineteen, and you had to have somebody sign for you, and he thought I was crazy. And, so, he wouldn't go. But, he didn't oppose my mother coming and signing for me-- Story_ID: 156255 Speaker 1: So, having said that, he [Hill's father, James Hill, Sr.], he let her [Hill's mother, Doretha Lowe Hill] make the decision and she realized that I was strong about going and that if I didn't go, I would limit my future potential. And, I wanted to go. It wasn't that I was being forced to go. And, she said it was worth the risk. Speaker 2: Okay. So, you, you went on bus. You took the bus trips every day? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And, tell me about the experience there [Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois] with these five thousand white students. Speaker 1: It was similar to the experience, it's--and maybe I'm just naive. I never look at myself in the mirror as a black male. I look at myself in the mirror as a male. So, I never--when I default to something, I never look at--through the lens of racism or ethnicity. I think, I'm just as equal as somebody else, and they're just as equal as I am. So, I've never historically made decisions, and I think that stems from my mother versus my dad who actually did--is impacted by race and made derogatory comments about African Americans versus somebody that was Caucasian. It was ingrained in him that we were inferior. Even though he wouldn't say that, if you, if he intellectualize it, but it goes back to the term I used earlier about cognate to distance [sic, cognitive dissonance]. His relatives and friends who were black were fine, but the guy in the street was the N-word. You know, it was kind of a self-hatred thing. Now, having said that, my mother was never like that and my mother was always free minded and that's why she would not let us use race as a crutch or as an obstacle, where you only block yourself. So, I guess I'm saying that to say, that when I got to school, it didn't bother me that I was one of three with five thousand whites. And, some of 'em were very nice, and were very friendly just like the teachers. And, I remember distinctly my best friend there was white. And, I went to his house, you know, his parents would pick me up. I couldn't just go there. And, they would make sure I got home all right. But, I mean, he was, he was somebody that I felt comfortable with and he felt comfortable with. Also, I was so, once again they are very studious "president of the library club." I, you know, I didn't have a lot of friends, so I would spent a lot of times in the library. The librarian realized how often I was there versus the other students, which was an old spinster Caucasian lady. And, I only mentioned that to talk about the difference. She took a real liking to me, 'cause she really, she didn't have any family at home. And, so, she would, on weekends for instance, she would need things like her lawn cut and, you know, things she couldn't do 'cause she was older. And, she would actually come by my house, pick me up, have me spend the day doing manual things, and pay me to do it. So, besides seeing her at school, she would actually, let--take me to her house. And, having said that, she would actually make sure at school that I wasn't abused by either other teachers or the system, because I was kinda like her surrogate son. And, so, I actually had a--the only thing that are bad things that I remember was like, for instance, I trying to think of who--what was the reason, it was something during the civil rights era that the students were all upset about. And, they actually had to, you know, white gangs against black gangs. And, they had decided that they were gonna beat up the blacks kids. And, so, the police actually came to school and actually made sure we got home safely. 'Cause they had got word that they were gonna, you know, kinda like what happened in Arkansas when the kids first went to school there. They had decided they were gonna beat up on the black kids as response to something that was going on during civil rights. And, that was the only negative thing. But, once again, in a day or two that passed over. So, I didn't really feel any fear after that episode. That didn't change my approach. Speaker 2: And, so, this teacher do you, or librarian, do you remember her name? Speaker 1: I don't. And, that bugs me 'til this day, 'cause as I'll mention there was another older white person that was advantageous when I was in college that really went out of their way. And, this is person that had nothing to do with my undergrad experience. But, it was very helpful to me and I can remember his name, but I don't remember the librarian's name. Story_ID: 156256 Speaker 1: Were there any other teachers [at Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois] that might have influenced you or inspired you to--because your next step is to go to college, so? Speaker 2: I had, you know, because it was so large, you weren't in contact, you know. Freshman year, you had different teachers, your sophomore year a different teacher, your junior year a different teachers, your senior year. But, on the other hand, especially in the sciences, I had teachers that realized that I had an aptitude in science. And, because, once again, I was kind of that sponge that knew I couldn't be a good athlete and I pursued education with a real-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --fever that they were always--once they picked up on the fact that I was really trying to go the extra yard just to learn, that they were very helpful. And, they didn't--there're very few teachers that I ever came away with that they were so prejudiced they didn't wanna interact. Story_ID: 156257 Speaker 1: Did they [Hill's teachers at Lane Technical College Preparatory High School in Chicago, Illinois] influence you in any way? Speaker 2: No, I mean, I didn't have--if you ask me did I have a, outside of the librarian, a mentor or some--I really, I'm kinda one of those guys, like I said, in grammar school [Jacob Beidler Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] I already--I mean, when I was young before I went to--you know, when I was in grammar school, I had decided to be a physician. So, I didn't need, I had never been exposed to a black physician other than reading about Charles Drew. For some of the historical figures, like the--I'm trying to think of the cardiovascular surgeon here in Chicago [Illinois] that did the first heart surgery at the hospital I born at--Provident [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois]; Daniel Hale Wil-- Speaker 1: Daniel Hale. Speaker 2: Daniel Hale Williams. Outside of reading about them, and knowing that it was possible, I really had no role models at high school [at Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois] that I was, that I depended upon to get me some life direction. Speaker 1: So, in high school, you still had this direction to be a physician though? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: Okay. So, that was never wavering? You didn't change at all about that? Speaker 2: I ultimately changed in college and went back. But, in high school, I was still gonna be a physician. Story_ID: 156258 Speaker 1: So, now, this is during the Civil Rights [Movement] time, and we, you, you know, we talked about that just for a quick minute. But, in your neighborhood [West Side, Chicago, Illinois] and in your community, what was going on that you remember? Were your parents [Doretha Lowe Hill and James Hill, Sr.] political, or involved in civil rights at all? Speaker 2: My dad, like I said, 'cause of that attitude that we shouldn't rock the boat. And, kind of subservient kind of approach, just like mentioned about college was his general approach. So, he thought that was crazy, why people were trying to buck the system. This is the way it is. And, once again, my mom was not a, didn't go out of her way to actively involved but was some--she said, "This had gotta change. This is not right," you know. So, she was much more of an activist, at least philosophically than he, than he was. And, but, her whole concern really was raising her kids. So, she didn't, you know, she wasn't gonna put herself in jeopardy for, if it meant that it was gonna affect us. And, as I mentioned, she did have some mental health issues. But, when she was lucid, in there, she was lucid in there and she was there for us. Now, having said that, 'cause of her childhood, she was determined that we were gonna have it better than she had it. Speaker 1: Well, what did you think about [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]? Speaker 2: Actually, when he came to Chicago [Illinois], bef--he actually lives, you know, I live not too far from the projects. So, he actually, was in the neighborhood when he was living in the housing projects when he came to Chicago. And, you know, on the news you see what happened when he did his march where, you know, he even said, he never faced racism until he came to Chicago. 'Cause they were hitting him in the head with bricks in Marquette Park, you know. Mayor [Richard J.] Daley was shunning 'em; the mayor. He really--and he left Chicago worse than he even left the situation when he initially went to Memphis [Tennessee] where he basically left not obtaining really what he want. And, so even though he'd stayed a whole summer in my neighborhood, so, that was the big news that Martin Luther King was in town. He didn't leave with any changes to the housing or the situation of blacks in Chicago. On the other hand, he did make it, he brought it to the table that things should change and they shouldn't be that way. So, where--my dad just accepted, this is the way it's gonna be and it's always gonna be this way. He did give us that thread of hope that it doesn't have to be this way. Story_ID: 156259 Speaker 1: And, what were your thoughts-- Speaker 2: Well-- Speaker 1: --as a young person in [Lane Technical College Preparatory] High School [Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Well, as I alluded to, my background was to think I-- I never, from the beginning I didn't think I was any different. So, I, I mean, I always (laughter), even though I wasn't always smart about it, I was always bucking the system. And, I had no problem from the very beginning saying, "I'm just as good as they are." And, anytime I felt that I was being discriminated 'cause of race, you know, I would do one of three things. I would respond. I would try to figure out if there was an obstacle, I would try to figure out either a way to go through it, over it, or under it. But, at the end of the day, it would be like a memory that I would erase from my memory banks. And, the only information I would keep was enough to avoid that situation again. But, I wouldn't, I wouldn't store with any emotions fearlessness that I, you know, they did me wrong and have any hate in my heart. And, that, and this is even before I evolved some of my own personal philosophy. I never, and I always gave a person a chance, just like the white teacher I described, the librarian. I always gave 'em a chance. I didn't assume, just 'cause she was an old spinster white lady, that she was gonna be mean to me, 'cause somebody else had been mean to me with that same background. So, I didn't do stereotypes. Story_ID: 156260 Speaker 1: Do you remember where you were when President [John F.] Kennedy was killed [1963]? Speaker 2: Yes. I was at home, watching a black and white TV. And, I rem--I think it was a Saturday morning. And, I remember Walter Cronkite coming in saying, "The president's been shot." And, then they start running this full fict--that we're--'cause my dad [James Hill, Sr.] was at home, I think then. And, so, we were kinda glued to the TV. Actually, I happened to be at home the morning of 9/11 [September 11, 2001], when the planes hit. And, to watch evolve in real time, not knowing what's happening was kinda unbelievable and that was a deja vu when that happened. But, anyway, I was at home with Kennedy. First Walter Cronkite, then they talk about trying to catch, I forget the guy's name that shot 'em, and they try to-- Speaker 1: Lee Harvey-- Speaker 2: What was his name? Speaker 1: Lee Harvey Oswald. Speaker 2: Lee Harvey Oswald, and then they started going through his history. Then, they said, "Aw, they see him at a show, then they shoot 'em, and then capture 'em." But, it's kinda like watching a real live soap opera on TV. So, yeah, I remember it 'cause I was at home watching my TV. Speaker 1: But, what were your thoughts about that though? Were, or, did you have any thoughts of what that meant? That the president of the United States was killed. Speaker 2: Well, what if--yeah, I did have thoughts on it. The reason, you know, once again, it was early on in the Civil Rights Movement and you--I remember the kids in Arkansas, Little Rock [Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], trying to go to school. I remember the guy [James Meredith] trying to get in the University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi]. I remember, you know, some of the early Freedom, Freedom Riders, and the three people [James Chaney, Andrew Goodman, and Michael Schwerner] that got killed in Mississippi. So, the context, I got, I always got the idea "even though I'm history buff," you realize how much, you know, probably [Lyndon Baines] Johnson for African American was a much better president than Kennedy. Kennedy did only things out of expediency much like Abraham Lincoln. 'Cause Abraham Lincoln really had no feelings for African American. That was a war decision to keep the nation from being divided. But, at that point, most people thoughts Kennedy was really pushing civil rights and was gonna do something. Not realizing that he was getting pressured, and it was really his brother, Robert [Kennedy], the attorney general, that was standing up to people. But, having said that, you know, we all felt a great loss then, 'cause he was the one that was changing things for us. Story_ID: 156261 Speaker 1: Now, how do you decide what college you're gonna go to? How do you prepare to go to college? Speaker 2: Well, my, like I said, my mom [Doretha Lowe Hill] probably didn't finish high school, but she never went into any detail. My dad [James Hill, Sr.], actually did go to two years of college; Tupelo College [possibly University of Mississippi-Tupelo, Tupelo, Mississippi] down South. And, actually, it real funny. He was gonna be, if you talk to 'em, he was thinking about being a mortician 'cause in--the only professional in that little small town was the funeral director (laughter), so, he was--so, medicine kind of, to him, he saw that as kind of an outside, an offshoot of being a funeral director in his mind. So, he was always pro, pro that occupation. So, it--I knew in order to do it, I had to go to college. I--but, one of my bad experience, and I won't say bad in the sense it was, it was, it made a mark on me. But, it did make a mark on my future response to society is I really didn't have a high school concert--counselor that care one iota where I was gonna go or what I was gonna do after high school [at Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois]. It was one of those things as, yeah, this is your counselor. What do you wanna know? I'll see you later. I mean, her thought was lets--you blacks kids just get yo' diploma and get outta here. I'm not gonna be helpful as far as you getting an education. But, once again, going back to my exposure at the Boys Club [later Boys & Girls Club of America], I had some role models, or people at least that had, had some college experience that kinda help me to, you know, 'cause I was, once again, at the Boys Club I would go to after school. And, once again, they--I was tutoring other kids, and I was being helpful that they went out of their way to make sure somebody would help me to navigate how to get into college. Speaker 1: And, so, the classes that you were taking in high school, was it a lot of science and math? Speaker 2: Yeah, remember, as I mentioned before, that was best subjects, so. Speaker 1: Right, but I notice that-- Speaker 2: I took, I was in the honors program-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Even at that school, they, you know, they had an honors program which was select school. I already, I was in the honors program. So, I was taking high level science course. Matter fact, it's for, I think, I finished undergrad in three years, and I think half of the first year, I AP'd [advanced placement] out 'cause I had already done the courses in high school. Speaker 1: And, so, Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] is where you decided to go to school. Well, let me just step back a second, who was the principal while you were at Lane [Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: You know, its five thousand kids, and like I said, as far as the administration, we were a necessary evil. I can't tell you. They didn't wanna interact with me (laughter). Story_ID: 156262 Speaker 1: You go on to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. Now, tell me about the experience of enrolling in college there. Speaker 2: What happened was, is that, and I found some things out later, it's like I said, I didn't have really a counselor to, spend any time trying to help me. And, actually, Northwestern, you know, like they have a college day. And, I went and, actually Northwestern and Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] both looked at my paperwork and said, "We're gonna admit you. And, do you wanna come?" And, my parents [Doretha Lowe Hill and James Hill, Sr.] never paid one cent for any of my education, nor could my father afford it. And, so, both of 'em came with a significant financial aid package because of my academics that, you know, I'm not--'cause I didn't have a counselor, I kind of--they both came to me. And, so, they said, "Fill out the applications, you can get in, and this is what we're gonna offer you finance." So, it actually, it was down, it was up-down rather than down-up with me making the effort. So, having said that, as it boiled down to, because of the financial aid package and them coming to me, those were really the only two schools that I was considering because I knew that they would take care of me financially. And, I went to Cornell and it was in the middle of nowhere. It was cold. It was a snowy day. And, I didn't have any support system there. I--they were out. I mean, I kinda like thinking I might go to an Ivy League school but, they were out based on their location and the weather. And, so, Northwestern 'cause we had had--that goes back to something I had said earlier, we had had involvement with the students as mentoring at the Boys Club [later Boys & Girls Club of America]. They used to take us up for picnics and take us to campus sometimes, that I had already, matter fact, by kidding as when I was younger, the only time I left the ten block area, was outside of my mother going downtown, was when the Northwestern students would take us up to Northwestern. So, it was like a different world when we went up there. You know, the North Shore, along the lake [Lake Michigan]. And, so, when I was offered that, that--and I knew I could take the L [elevated train] up there and so I could be home with my family on weekends, that was an ideal situation, so that's why I chose Northwestern. Speaker 1: And, you majored in biology, correct? Speaker 2: Correct. Speaker 1: And, how many other blacks were majoring in biology? Speaker 2: I think one or two. But, I think, I'm the only one that actually got a degree at the end of the day in biology. Speaker 1: And, do you remember anything about the professors there? Speaker 2: Not, not really. Except, there was an Eisenstein [ph.] and a Moses [ph.]. And, they weren't actually biology professors. I, once again, they had--you had to have a student job. So, I needed money to buy pizzas, for personal items, and so I have a, what they call it; a work-study program. And, so, my work study program was I worked either in the cafeteria or I worked in the economics department. And, you know, these the old days when computer were first coming out, where you had punch, you had these punch cards kinda like Florida in the election [2000 presidential election]. So, they would make all these punch cards with data and then put it in the computer. And, Northwestern, like the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], was big on theory and economic research. And, so, my job was to help punch these cards in, to get the data so they could run it through these old computes that filled up half a room, to come up with these, you know, projects that the Ph.D. students were working on. So, I remember, and actually it ends up being significant because his wife was also a teacher there. And, she ended up--my wife [Sandra Hill] would babysit for 'em. And, so, actually it's a story of vows that ended up being a prominent role on how I got into medical school. And, so, yeah, I remember those, Eisenstein I remember, but if you ask me do I remember, once again, you're talking about large classes, I finished in three years. And, I really didn't have a major relationship with anybody in the biology or the science department. Story_ID: 156263 Speaker 1: I don't think we, we really talked about how science became the subject that really piqued your interest. From the very beginning you were a good student. But, why science? Speaker 2: I think it peaked my interest 'cause I was innately good at it. I mean, I, you know, it's something that you know. I was poor in sports but science it was like breathing air. I mean, it was something that was innate and I was good at it. So, I got a lot of instant gratification 'cause I was doing things nobody else could do. So, the reason piqueing my interest is 'cause, one, it really was effortless to do. And, two, people were so surprised how good I was that I got a lot of positive reinforcement. Story_ID: 156264 Speaker 1: Now, you also mentioned, at this time now you're in medical school [Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], you mentioned earlier so we need to go back and talk about the fact that you married young, and you're married when you go to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois]. Is that correct? Speaker 2: Right. I got married as a-- Speaker 1: You got married? Speaker 2: --sophomore. As an undergrad sophomore. Speaker 1: Okay. So, let's talk about your wife [Sandra Hill] and tell us the story about your marriage. Speaker 2: I'm still married. Speaker 1: (Laughter). Speaker 2: And, it's forty-four years later. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm still married. We met, my wife is actually from the South Side [of Chicago, Illinois], which is once again, you usually don't intermingle West Siders and South Siders. But, we met on the Northwestern campus. And, we met the first day up there. And, you know, a group of students after orientation, you walk to the show. And, so we started talking that very first day, and she knows this, but I had told her within twenty-four hours that I was gonna marry her. And, she thought I was crazy. She had a boyfriend from the South Side. She only had met me right away. And, I was little, I mean, her boyfriend was an athlete. I was this little, short, no consequence individual that just happens to be smart. And, so, you know, I did something; we were walking back, it was a cold day, 'cause it was September and it had got prematurely cold. And, I let her use my sweater and everything else. And, so, when I kinda told her that, she thought I was crazy, which a lot people say on a regular basis. 'Cause like I said, I don't have a big filter of my thoughts (laughter). And, so, she thought that was the furthest thing and she said that was impossible. But, typically me I didn't take rejection personally, nor did I let it stop me (laughter). I figured out how to go around it, over, and under it. So, ultimately we did start dating. And, she was like I mentioned babysitting for this--two professors who were married. And, I had decided that I wanted to live off campus. And, they said, "Well, the only way you're gonna get out of your dorm contract, is you gonna either die or get married." So, of course, on Wednesday, I made the decision to get married (laughter). This is on a Wednesday. So, I think, we told our parents on Thursday, and I went, typically me, I had researched it after that. So, I knew I could go down to [Chicago] City Hall, get a license in the morning, and go around the street and have some, you know, jackleg minister marry us. So, she was down with that, to use the kid's terminology. So, we, I called my dad [James Hill, Sr.]. He say, "You're crazy. Don't--until you come with sense, don't talk to me about it." So, then I say to my mother [Doretha Lowe Hill], 'cause I needed somebody to sign at nineteen. So, I called my mother and said, "I wanna get married. I'm serious about his. I don't care what daddy say. I wanna get married." She said, "I don't think it's a good idea. But, okay. I'll--if you come pick me up, I'll go down and sign for you." And, so, on Friday, we went and got our blood test at the student health. I rented a car, and I--naw, I used one of the other students'--senior students' had a car. Went in their car. Saturday--I found out what time City Hall was gonna open to get the license. We got down there half an hour ahead of time. So, we were third or fourth in line going in. Her mother came. My mother came. My mother signed. We then went around the corner to someplace they said you could get married. Got married. She was from the South Side. So, we had to bring her mothers home. So, we stopped at Browns Chicken on 32nd Street, had a little meal, dropped her mother off, went back. By that time, it was getting late afternoon. Went to a party on campus, and at midnight, I think I was working at the post office then. At midnight I work the third shift, I went to work. And, I think we had stopped that Saturday, naw, we didn't do that until the following week. We went and--I went to Cardow's Jeweler [ph.], which is a small jeweler, and put the--a ring in lay-a-way (laughter). In which we didn't get 'til six months later. And, I think a year later, we decided we were gonna do our honeymoon. And, we drove to Detroit [Michigan] and went to Windsor [Ontario, Canada], across the [Ambassador International] Bridge for our honeymoon, which was probably about a year later (laughter). But, I had my studio apartment, and I was out of my dorm contract, and I was still in love. Like I said, I had already decided I was gonna marry her, the first day I met her, so. It was just precipitated by, so I don't wanna make it sound like the dorm cont--was the only reason I got married. It's just--that, that said, why not do it now. Story_ID: 156265 Speaker 1: You mentioned also that you worked at the post office. Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: And, this was undergrad [at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. So, how did you become, how did you come to work at the post office? Speaker 2: I just applied and I just, once again, you know, being good on, in science, you had to figure out the scheme of how you consider this things and put letters into, you know, they didn't have the machines that put letters through. You had to do everything by hand. And, they wanted people that could do it quickly. So, I went there, and they had students that would work there during the summer. And, this was before jobs got hard to do that they wanted students to come to offset some of the work. So, I went there and of course, within a few hours I would fill out the scheme and I could sit there and throw letters in the right box, you know, based on the numbers. So, they said, "Hey, you're hired," (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. So, this was a part-time job? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. And, do you remember about your apartment, where you live, the studio apartment? Speaker 2: Yeah. It's an area in North Chicago [Illinois]--Evanston [Illinois], where Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] is, it's a first suburb that borders on the north end of Chicago. And, they had an area just at the border between Evanston and Chicago, that's in Chicago they used to call it Juneway Terrace. It's where the L [elevated train] ended. It was--I kind see the area, big apartment buildings that sold cheaply. And, so, I got a studio apartment right at the border and Evanston and Chicago in this relatively seedy area. Speaker 1: You remember how much you paid for rent? Speaker 2: It was like a hundred dollars. It was, it was fairly cheap. Speaker 1: So, we're in about what, 19--? Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979]. Speaker 1: Seventy [1970]? Speaker 2: I mean '69 [1969]. Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969]. Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Story_ID: 156266 Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, is there anything else that you remember about undergrad, about Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], you wanna talk about (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well getting back to the importance of the professor, my wife [Sandra Hill] babysitting. Actually, I was thinking I had done so well at science here at Northwestern, I kinda like my job. As I mentioned, was working as a work study in the economics department, and seeing how professors kinda walk around in cheap--in tweed coats and lecture for two hours a day and drink coffee all day, and kinda don't do much, other than have a meeting with a couple of graduate students who actually do all the work as far as the research. I kinda could get into that professor lifestyle. So, I had done so well, I was thinking about--and Northwestern had a great chemistry department, and one of the things I, besides biology I excelled in and my degree ended up being in biology. 'Cause like I said, I left after three years, is I had decided, I had a degree in under--in organic and organic chemistry and physics, I thought, maybe I'll be a chemistry professor, 'cause I kinda like that lifestyle of giving one or two lectures a week and sitting around. So, lo and behold, when I thought about that, they had the first draft lottery. And, I get this call from my wife's mother saying, "What day is your birthday?" And, Sandra, and Sandra was, my wife, Sandra was babysitting. I said, "September 14, 1949." She said, "I think that's the first birthday they pulled out in the draft lottery." And, it was. And, so, I get, ultimately get a card saying that you gotta go down, get your physical, 'cause we're changing your draft status. My wife started crying as she was--one of the times she was babysitting with these two professors, they said, that I was gonna end up having to go. 'Cause I wasn't smart enough, or nor did I have an inclination to go to Canada. Like I said, I went to Northwestern to be around my family. So, I--and everybody knew I was going to Vietnam anyway. So, I was gonna just go. I mean, I didn't have any reason to be a conscientious objector, and the only other way you could get out was go to Canada. I wasn't gonna do that. And, so, she told 'em that, and they found out about it. And, they knew my academic record. They called administration said, "You got this guy on full scholarship, he's great in science, and you're gonna let him go to Vietnam?" And, then they scratched their head and said, "No, maybe we shouldn't do that." And, so, they talked to me. And, one day I was an undergrad, the next day I was in medical school [Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois]. I never applied to medical school. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: And, so, then by me getting in medical school, then it stopped that whole draft process, 'cause now I was actually in medical school. Story_ID: 156267 Speaker 1: And, that, that's very interesting. So, next thing you knew, you were in medical school [Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: So, tell me what happens next. Speaker 2: Well, medical school, I was one of three African Americans in a total of probably six out of the four years. And, I went to Northwestern quite, like I said, 'cause I never applied to medical school. So, of course, I went to Northwestern, and I still had to work full-time. And, once again, I was smart enough that, and this is before computers and everything else that I could read the books. I could work, and then I was working full-time at the post office. I could work the third shift, sleep in the morning, miss half the classes, but do alright on the exam, 'cause I could read the stuff and process it without even physically being there. And, I distinctly remember one--and it turns around, life is a real circle, 'cause he ended up having to be under me in the future. One, neurology professor, who was a basic scientist in neurology, came up to me one day that I happened to be at class, and say, "I'm gonna flunk you, 'cause you never come to class. And, if the curve is anywhere near where you're at, I'm gonna flunk you." And, so, he said, any--so he told me that, and of course, typically me, is that I took that as a challenge. And, I still didn't change my lifestyle. I still didn't go to class most of the time. And, didn't show up to the labs, and something else. So, then the exams comes, and I placed in the 90 percent. And, so, he had a dilemma. You either flunk all of--the majority of the class, or you have to accept the fact that, despite me not being in class, that I knew the material. And, it hurt his heart, 'cause the couldn't justify--he knew it would've been such an outrage to flunk 90 percent of the class that he--you could just see the frown on his face when he had to pass me (laughter). Story_ID: 156268 Speaker 1: The other students in medical school [Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] with you, tell me about them. Speaker 2: Actually, it's really unique, because at that point in time, if you think about the filters and how everybody got to that level, they had to be exceptional. 'Cause I remember, once again, me and my unfiltered self, I remember one time having a professor use a racial joke. You know, he's like, I almost remember the joke, he was talking about something, and he said, "Well, it's like a coon in an outhouse," or something derogatory toward African Americans. And, he felt he could do that and get away with it. I wrote a letter to the dean. I have a meeting with the dean. I went to class, and he thought it was, "Well, I didn't say anything, this is the norm." I said, "Naw, it ain't the norm. You can't sit in here and use racial jokes as part of your lecturers." And, so, ultimately I made such a stink and I, and you know, we had fairly large Jewish contention that they kinda leaped on it too 'cause they felt that they were discriminated too. 'Cause they did have a quota system not only for blacks but for Jews during that period of time, that they reprimanded him for that. Then, I also remember, they wouldn't let me do my OB-GYN at the hospital. You know, 'cause at Northwestern [Memorial] Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] was, you know, in the Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois], and they had very prominent, you know, that wasn't a hospital that blacks frequent. And, so, I went there the first day, and of course, they wasn't gonna let us do pelvic exams on, me at least, on white patients. And, so, what they did is they actually said, "Well, y'all just observe. There's not gonna be a hand one experience." And, so, I knew what they meant. And, so, what I did, I went to one of the assistant deans and say, "You know what, I think I can get better experience at Cook County Hospital [later, John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois]." And, he said, "You know what, I think that's a good idea." And, so, I ended up being the only student that took the OB-GYN clerkship at Cook County. I had a great experience 'cause the birth thing--I mean, it was great experience and, but at all fairness to my class, they really got upset. 'Cause their point was, once again, just like this racial thing is, why you gonna not--you got every other class have a hands on experience. Why you gonna stop us just 'cause of him, and support. They didn't think it was right that they were gonna make this judgment. And, I didn't think it was right that my whole class was gonna be punished because I was there. And, so, that's why I thought it was a solution. But, in their--to talk for them, they actually were, my classmates were very supportive of, I should've fought it, and not let 'em get away with it. Speaker 1: Do you remember who, well, you made that decision in--so you thought that was a, the right way to go. But, who were some of the, your, the students in the class with you? Speaker 2: One student, it's real interesting, I'm not--like I mentioned before, I'm not great at names. But, because I was married [to Sandra Hill], I actually still stayed on Juneway Terrace. I used to take the L [elevated train] down. So, I didn't live in the dorm with the other students. And, so, I was kinda not, you know, I had medical fraternities, and sororities, and I was never, you know, I had to work. I had a full-time job at night, and I had a family. So, I actually, didn't spend a lot of time. But, there were a few other students that also were like that. And, I remember distinctly they guy who I just saw a few months ago, and that's what I say, I'm not great with name, it starts with an S, he is now the president of Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York, David J. Skorton]. I don't mean the dean of the medial school. He's the president of the university. We used to drive, and he had been president of [University of] Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa] before he went to Cornell. We would drive to school together. He lived on the route and I had a car, and so, I would pick him up and he would come down to school together. And, actually, we had a basketball team that we had that was in the neighborhood. It had nothing to do with the medical school. And, he would play basketball with him. And, so, I was kind of close to some of the students that weren't, how can I say, geographically were--that kinda of had their own families and not--that were kinda going to school but weren't teenyboppers. Story_ID: 156269 Speaker 1: Who was the dean [of Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] at that time? Do you remember that? Speaker 2: It was initially Dean [Richard H.] Young, who actually, ultimately ended up being president of the whole university [sic]. Speaker 1: Okay. And, was James, what's his name, [James E.] Eckenhoff? Speaker 2: Eckenhoff ended up being the dean before I left medical school, who was had actually had been the chairman of the anesthesia department. Speaker 1: Okay. And, talk about some of the courses that were taken in, that you took specifically in medical school? Speaker 2: Saying that you wanna portrayed in a story. I got a great story about anatomy. You know, everybody see anatomy on TV, and you actual do dissect the real body. You have a body, mines was named Herman. And, you know, you really bond with her cadaver. And, you go in at night and you dissect them and everything like that. And, so, I--my siblings, and my mom [Doretha Lowe Hill], and my wife [Sandra Hill] got a little curious, you know, 'cause I'm spending a night, weekends down at the lab. And, so, I said, "Y'all wanna come?" So, they, they came. First the fell--smell of the formaldehyde when you walk in there, 'cause you're talking about fifty bodies with formaldehyde. I saw one brother dash back to the elevator. And, so, my mom looked like she was gonna puke. And, I don't think anybody every made it to the body (laughter). 'Cause, they thought about what they wanted to do, and they realized they really didn't wanna see a dead body (laughter) a real. So, I can remember laughing at 'em all as they are running out of the building. Nobody ever viewing the body. Story_ID: 156270 Speaker 1: So, what about organic chemistry? Everyone says that that's something that's not a favorite subject or challenging in medical school. Did you-- Speaker 2: Well, you take that--really, organic is part of the requirements for medical school. You do that as an undergrad. I mean, you do pharmacology, you do other things that have an organic chemistry background. But, organic was the big thing in college that determined whether you're gonna go to medical-- Speaker 1: Oh, I see. Speaker 2: --school or not. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, as I said, I was gonna be, I was thinking about getting a Ph.D. in chemistry. Organic I had no problem with. Story_ID: 156271 Speaker 1: So, now tell me the process. Once you're ready to finish medical school and you go on to internships and residency. Tell me about that. Speaker 2: The process is that somewhere your third year, you gotta make a decision 'cause your fourth year is all elective where you--there's a few requirements. But, by in large, you're kinda interviewing to get a residency. 'Cause you need letters of recommendations to get a residency and you need it in that discipline. At that point in time, I was gonna--I had made the decision I wanted to be a neurosurgeon. And, this is way before [HM Benjamin] Carson [Sr.], you know. I had decided--'cause I'm older than Carson. I decided, and they're weren't that many, actually I can think of any black neurosurgeon I knew at that time. And, but, that was not the reason, I wanted to do it. The reason I wanted to do it is 'cause I wanted to be a surgeon and that appealed to me as a kinda of a challenge. So, I wanted to be a neurosurgeon. So, all my senior--senior year and actually once again, I had done so much that I actually was done with medical school [Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] in three in a half years. So, I had six months 'til graduation that I had to figure out what to do. 'Cause I had done all the course work, 'cause I kept going to school every summer, I didn't take the summers off, that I was done. But, I had decided I wanted to be a neurosurgeon. So, at the end, my, at the end of my third year, beginning of the fourth year when I was finishing up, I took neurosurgery. And, I went, I love the neu--his name was Dr. [Anthony J.] Raimondi; he took me under this wing. 'Cause he knew I wanted to be a neurosurgeon. He was chairman, and he was, he was Italian, Italian. Meaning he spoke Italian, he wasn't born here, he was born in Italy [sic, born in Chicago, Illinois]. He actually trained in Italy, and he just came here. And, he had a hard time. He was chief at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and then had gone to North--come over to Northwestern [University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], and because he spoke, 'cause he was Italian, he felt discriminated against. So, he was very sympathetic to a minority candidate wanting to go into his field. Because he felt being Italian, Italian and with the accent that the white society had discriminated against him. So, for me to be enthused in it, he took me under his wing. And, I loved him, 'cause he as one of the only guys, and I've had a long career, that could operate equally well with his right and left hand. He didn't have a dominant hand. He truly was ambidextrous. So, if he taking out a little two millimeter brain tumor, how he held the instrument depended on what side of the head it was on. It didn't depend, he had to use his right and or left hand because it was--even if he was operating with a microscope. He could operate just as well with either hand. So, anyway, and his specialty was actually pediatrics neurosurgery. And, so, one of the things he said, "Why don't you come up, you had done adults. Why don't come up and spend some time with me up at Children's [Memorial Hospital, later, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]?" So, of course, I went up there. And, I found out that I love the surgery. But, watching kids die of brain tumors, or kids with hydrocephalous, knowing that you really can't cure 'em or they end up with some permanent deficient, like paralysis, or mental retardation, despite your best efforts. I said, "I can't do this," I can't--and my wife [Sandra Hill] was pregnant then, too. And, I said, "I cannot go home at night and knowing a kid's gonna die." That's just not my personality. So, then I said, "Oh, what I'm gonna do?" 'Cause I wanna be surgeon, I can't, I can't pass out pills all day, you know, and I couldn't do OB [obstetrics] 'cause I had my own sexual hang-ups. And, ophthalmology you can't talk. So, I need to be fitting--I had already decided I needed to do the specialty that I could do the rest of my life and be happy to go to work, 'cause I'm happy to go to work. Has nothing to do with financial incentives, nothing else. I just like to do it. So having said that, I ran a little bit of track in high school and college, and orthopaedics was just developing then, I said, "Hm, I'd do orthopaedics." I had never done a clerkship so I couldn't get a letter of recommendation from anybody in orthopaedics 'cause I hadn't done it. Story_ID: 156272 Speaker 1: There were only a few black surgeons and there were no black faculty members at Northwestern [University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] at that time. There were no clinical, there was one guy in basic science that taught infectious disease, but there were no black clinical physicians at Northwestern. And, so, I had spent time at [Cook] County [Hospital, later John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] and so, and there were several black surgeons in the area, who knew--had heard of me, 'cause there weren't that many black medical students. And, so, I was kind of a trailblazer to have somebody black that actually goes to Northwestern. And, so, they, they, you know, they knew me and so I went to them and I said, "Hey, can you write me a letter of recommendation?" And, actually Dr. [Anthony J.] Raimondi wrote me a letter of recomm--when I told him why I wasn't going into neurosurgery and he understood that, why I made that decision, he had no problem. But, I had nobody in orthopaedics to do it. And, so, they ended up getting a new chairman of orthopaedics, maybe a year before I applied. And, it was a guy who as it turned out, I ended up going into practice with. It was a guy who came down from the University of Minnesota [Minneapolis, Minnesota], who was an Irish Catholic from New York, who had a huge family, who had that kinda liberal Minnesota approach to life versus this constipated Presbyterian Chicago [Illinois] approach to life. And, so, he felt that he'd be nice to have a black resident. And, so, despite me not having done anything and not really done the right things to get into it. Once again, I was a, I was a good medical student even though I didn't go to class (laughter). And, so, he--it was between me and there was a Williams Clinic here. And, when-[HM] Dr. [James] Williams, there were a group of black brothers [Dr. Jasper F. Williams, Dr. Charles L. Williams, and Dr. James Williams], like Pill Hill [Chicago, Illinois] is an area where the black middle class was here in Chicago [Illinois]. They were Muhammad Ali's physicians. They were four [sic, three] brothers that were physicians that had gone to Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and they had a son who wanted to go in orthopaedics. And, you know, so of course, they thought they had colt. And, so, he looked at both of our records, and he--and we became friends. We didn't know this was happening, you know, once again, he went to the University of Illinois [College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois]. I'm at Northwestern as an undergrad. So, we never interacted at all. And, so, it ends up, he interviewed both of us, this chairman. And, during the interview, I actually had read more books, 'cause besides what I do, I am especially a history buff, I actually had written--read more books than he had read. Meaning, you know, whether it was 'War and Peace,' [Leo Tolstoy] or whatever that had nothing to do with medicine. So, our whole interview was, he was trying to get to know us. It had nothing to do with medicine. And, so, he was so impressed that--of my, like I said, that's why I was president of the library club (laughter), I spent a lot of time reading, that he picked me. Even though he got more pressure, 'cause these other kids was relatives were prominent black physicians that he decided--and, he knew I could handle it 'cause I was already in the Northwestern environment. And, so he picked me to get into the residency. Speaker 2: And, what was his name? Speaker 1: Bill Kane [Dr. William J. Kane]. Speaker 2: Kane, okay. Story_ID: 156273 Speaker 1: You were talking about, off camera, you were stopped by the police, and what happened? Speaker 2: I'm sure, everybody including [HM Barack] Obama has a Trayvon Martin story. The ending may be different but the story is the same. And, like I said, I lived on the Juneway Terrace [border of Evanston, Illinois and Chicago, Illinois], there was a relatively seedy area. And, some black man had--they were six foot tall with a beard and a leather jacket had robbed somebody at the L [elevated train] station. So, of course, I show up at the L station with a leather jacket and being 5'6", with no beard and no mustache, and they arrest me. And, they cart me off, you know, they cart--actually they stopped in a car 'cause my wife [Sandra Hill] was with me. No, they stopped me in my car, you know, in the neighborhood. A block from where my apartment building, and they said, "Get out of the car, we're looking for a robbery suspect, you fit the bill." As I found out ret--later on, because I happened to have a leather jacket on, not 'cause I was physically, anywhere near the person they were looking for. And, they took me to the lockup and started interrogating me. And, I didn't what--I, they never told me why they did it. And, in Chicago [Illinois], we have, you know, big lawsuits have gone on for years here, about where police were torturing people under confessions. And, I was never tortured, so I'm not saying that. But, they did put lights on me and the whole bit. And, my wife was just frantic. So, she called another friend of ours from undergrad school [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], who happened to be living in the same area, to come down. 'Cause she didn't, I don't think she knew how to drive then. And, so he drove (laughter), and drove down there, and almost tore my car up, 'cause he didn't know what he was doing. And, ultimately, somebody said, you know, "The guy we're looking for is six foot tall"--'cause I'm sitting in this pen with these other prisoners now--"Six foot tall and has a mustache, I don't think this is the guy." They said, "Hum, maybe he's not." And, so, they let me out (laughter). Speaker 1: That has to be a horrible experience. And, especially if this was your first time dealing with the-- Speaker 2: Naw. But, I can, naw--I mean, being black in Chicago that, that's, you know, don't raise your voice or say anything when you get stopped. That's not an unusually occurrence. And, you know, they talk about the new Jim Crow, the old Jim Crow before this new Jim Crow, which has to do with drugs, was not a whole lot different. You know, all you had to do was be black. Story_ID: 156274 Speaker 1: Okay. So, let's go back, so, you're in med--doing your internships and your residencies, and you talk about the different hospitals that you go through in your residency. And, we have Northwestern Memorial [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] for a year; and, VA Lakeside [Clinic, Chicago, Illinois], six months; Evanston [Hospital, Evanston, Illinois], six months; Children's Memorial [Hospital, later, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], Cook [County Hospital, later John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], you talked about Cook, and Columbus [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois]. Is that Columbus, Ohio? Speaker 2: Naw. It's--there used to be a Columbus Hospital-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That actually is now closed and it's condos (laughter). Speaker 1: (Laughter) okay. So, are there any experiences that stick out of your mind, in your mind, like the Children's Memorial experience? At either, VA or any other one of the hospitals? Speaker 2: Well, I actually, once again, because of blessings from God, meaning my aptitude in science and stuff, you know, I academically--I never had a problem until--and, also, I was the only black person, so, number one, being in the ninety-nine--we did--I was the first resident that every scored. They have in-service exams, as you go along the hi--make sure your progressing, they had never anybody that scored in the 90 percent. And, I got 99 percent. And, so, they kind of because of that, and because the chairman, who I ultimately went into practice with, was, you know, wanted to make sure that they didn't use race against me. I was kinda of a special case. Matter fact, one of the guys--I spent a year up at Evanston [Illinois], which was kind of the North Shore area here. It'd be the expense--like being in an expensive area in Connecticut and New York and commute in. The North Shore is where the big money is in Chicago [Illinois]. And, so, I spent a year and a half there. And, one of the attending orthopaedic surgeons came up to me, "Are you the descendent of some African king or something? It's just you come in so confident, number one," you know, 'cause they're just used to blacks being servants. "And, two, you outsmart and outdo everybody else here, you must've genetically--you couldn't have come from the West Side of Chicago, from parents that were sharecroppers." I mean, I had to an exception 'cause they, they didn't know how to classify me. 'Cause I didn't kowtow nor could they outsmart me. And, so, most of my experiences were positive. And, actually, I elected not to be--I didn't wanna be chief resident. I didn't need no title. So, actually, I was the first resident. I had had such a good experience at Cook County where I did OB [obstetrics] as a medical student, that I told the chairman, I didn't wanna be chief resident at Northwestern. Let me go to County and spend a year at County. So, I spent my senior year at County. And, that was doing turbulent times at County when they were closing it and other things. But, I had a great time on my undergraduate, I mean, my medical school and my residency time at Cook County. Matter fact, they started a residency program and I had spent time there in medical school that the only two residencies that I applied to was Northwestern or, I was gonna be in Cook County's initial residency. Story_ID: 156275 Speaker 1: Let's go on to what happens after your residency [at Cook County Hospital, later John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: What happened, at that time, most people completed a residency and went into practice. I really felt, once again my idea of; one, trying to control my own destiny to--with what God let me control. 'Cause our God controls everything, but I wanna give him at least a few ideas that he (laughter) might wanna consider before he direct me in one way or another. So, I figured out that if I wanted to live up to my potential, I would be much better getting some, what you would consider an academia, some post-graduate training. And, in my group, Northwestern [University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] had a fairly large residency. And, so, there were ten people in my year. And, I was the only one that elected to do a post-graduate training. Meaning, to spend time in another area where you--a concentrated area of orthopaedics, whether than just going into practice after a residency. So, that was an interesting story too. So, I went to the chairman, who was like I said from day one, you know, I was kind of his favorite. Actually, the other residents would even say it, even though they were all white, they said, "You the favorite. You can get away with anything, where he gives us a hard time." So, I went to the chairman, I said, you know, "I wanna do some extra training." And, then he looked at me. 'Cause he actually got a Ph.D. So, besides being an orthopaedic surgeon, he had actually spent time getting a Ph.D. So, to have a resident come to him that wanna actually do extra training, he was ecstatic. So, he said, "Well, what do you wanna do it in?" And, this was when sports medicine was just emerging, when people started doing knee sculpts and everything else. So, when my residency, everybody used to have the big incisions on the knee. And, so, we--they just had started, just had come from Japan where you can start doing microscopic surgery on knees. So, I said, you know, once again, me not liking sick people, "This guy taking care of athletes, during microscopic surgery, that's sounds like what I wanna do." So, I--he said, "Okay." Then the next thought is, "Then where do you wanna do it?" I said, of course, "The places that are the best." And, the place that are the best is, at California, the Kerlan-Jobe [Orthopaedic Clinic, Los Angeles, California], like the guy that operated on Tommy John's elbow, was one place. And, then the other place was Columbus, Georgia, the guy that operated on Archie [sic, Robert] Griffin, III. What's his name? But, anyway, Columbus, Georgia--Andrews, Jim [James] Andrews, were the two prominent places for sports medicine. So, of course, I said, "I wanna go there." It's interesting, the guy that was prominent--so he contacted them both, based on my desires. Speaker 1: And, this Dr. who? Speaker 2: Dr. [William J.] Kane. Speaker 1: Kane. Okay. Speaker 2: Dr. Kane, who was chairman. He contacted them both, 'cause like I said, it was unusual to do extra training. The guy down at the Hughston Clinic [Columbus, Georgia], I had met him at a meeting. And, he was the typically southerner was--you know, Columbus, Georgia is in the middle of nowhere, as you know. And, so, he was, you know, he was a typical southerner, next generation from plantation owners mentality. On the other hand, once again, and I've gone through life with this all the time, that after people get to know me then they don't--stop seeing color again. And, just like I don't see color. It's real interesting if you approach 'em that way so you don't see color to make your decision, they after a while forget that you're black (laughter). And, so, he even though he's a hardcore southerner, I had interact--'cause I had written papers as a resident. You know, I had done research and things in ra--so, he knew of me. And, so, the chairman at some meeting or something, he brought me to introduce me to 'em. Actually, I think it was in Atlanta [Georgia]. Where I was at a meeting in Atlanta, he was there, and he said, "Why don't you go ahead a meet Jack Hughston," which was a senior guy then. And, and, I have talked to him about you wanting to come down here and doing a residency. So, this is like '78 [1978]. And, so, I--he meets me, and say, "I have read some of the things you're written, I think you would be a great addition, but we're not ready to have someone black"--and he was, he was not saying it in a malignant way. He was truthfully honest. He said, "We're just not ready for a black to come down here examining patients. And, so, I want you to come, but I know we're not ready." And, so, I thanked him. And, he actually, to this day, he invited me back to lecture when I got done. I mean, but he was--I respect the fact that he was just blatantly honest and he didn't, he didn't sidestep the issue. So, then, I ended up of course, out in California. So, I ended up doing my extra training out there. They wanted me to stay. I actually, during my training, I got to go see Magic Johnson. I was, I actually went back with Kareem [Abdul Jabbar] 'cause he hurt his ankle. But, I got to see the [Los Angeles] Lakers win the World Championship. I was on the field at the, at Pasadena [California] when Lynn Swann made the catch in the Super Bowl [XIV, 1980]. I got to see the [Los Angeles] Dodgers work the World Series. I mean, they took care of all the teams in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. They wanted me to stay. Story_ID: 156276 Speaker 1: My chairman calls me, Bill [William J.] Kane, he says, "I want you to come back and come into practice with me." And, my wife [Sandra Hill] hated California anyway, which is a sidelight. But, anyway, so, he said, "I want you to come back." And, I actually ended up being the first geographic African American at Northwestern [University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois]. And, no matter what department. There was nobody in medicine, there was--I was the first one clinically that was geographically full-time at Northwestern. So, he called and said, "Hey, I want you to come back. I'll pay your moving fee. I know you don't have no money. I'll pay for you to move. I'll help you get a house. I want you to come back." And, after he had done--my wife wanted to come back. And, actually during my fellowship we had another kid. And, she just, she said, "I can't deal with these earthquakes." So, she hop--my brother comes to visit me, and she hops on a plane and goes back with him. So, I knew (laughter) she wasn't gonna deal with it. So, I ended up, that's why I actually came back to Chicago [Illinois] after my fellowship here. And, went into practice with a guy that let me--couldn't do my fellowship, my residency at Northwestern. Speaker 2: Okay. So, actually, you said '78 [1978], but was this '79 [1979] to '80 [1980]? Speaker 1: Well, the application process for the fellowship was '78 [1978]. But my fellowship, I was making out, you know, would start in '79 [1979]-- Speaker 2: Nine [1979]. Speaker 1: And ended in '80 [1980]. Speaker 2: Right. And, this was the National Athletic Institute of Health [sic, National Athletic Health Institute]? Speaker 1: Correct. Speaker 2: Inglewood, California. Okay. Wonderful. Story_ID: 156277 Speaker 1: Now you make it back to Chicago [Illinois], and, and what department do you become attached to [at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: Orthopaedics. Speaker 1: Orthopaedics. Okay. And, tell me about that. Speaker 2: Well, I came back and, once again, like I said, it basically was private practice. I was down here on the Gold Coast of Chicago, with my chairman [William J. Kane], and act--once again, you know, I was doing something unique. And, so, I probably, 80 to 90 percent of my patients were white, and very few black patients. So, because of that, I actually ended up donating time at the [Jesse Brown] VA [Medical Center] in [Cook] County [Chicago, Illinois], 'cause I felt I should give something back to the neighborhood. 'Cause like I said, my practice was in the most, it'd be like downtown, it'd be like special surgery in New York [City]. I mean, it was at an exclusive area that African Americans didn't frequent. And, so, I ended up getting a fairly robust practice fairly quickly because of the unique thing I brought to the table. Having said that, it's real funny, 'cause I was the first full-time black clinician. It was during this era of the early '80s [1980s]. So, I kept hearing these things, well, he's just here 'cause of a quota. And, then, the chairman would tell 'em, "Wait, now. Do you have anybody that ever got 99 percent on the exam? He's not here 'cause of a quota, he's academic better than any of the other residents I've ever had." So, I had more of a fight, not with the patients 'cause the patients could understand that I brought something unique to the table. So, I've had experienced where I've had Hells Angels motorcycle guys drop bullets and leave it on the thing, with anti-racist, you know, white power tattoos come in my office and say, "Why don't you go to a picnic?" I'm sure if I went to their neighborhood dressed as I normally would, they would shoot me. But, they had no probably going under, down to anesthesia and letting me operate on 'em. I was different. After a while, like I said, they don't see you as black anymore. Story_ID: 156278 Speaker 1: So, now, you're at west--at Northwestern [University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] for most of your career. Is that correct? Speaker 2: I've been there my whole career. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. And, there's a list, I mean, a list (laughter) of positions from instructor to--you wanna talk about when you actually become a professor, and you start--how are you able to, or how many African American professors are they in orthopaedicsurgery, at any time? Speaker 2: Well, I'm the only one that's ever been. And, I was the first, you know, not--once again, I kinda almost hate this other than the fact that I wanna document it. As, I'm the first full professor at Northwestern's medical school in any department. Speaker 1: Okay. So, the whole (simultaneous). Speaker 2: And, they only have two others now. But, I was the first, period, of any department. Speaker 1: Okay. And, do you wanna talk about some of the positions that you held during your stay there, during your tenure there? Speaker 2: Well, I guess the prominent positions was, I was chief of staff of the whole hospital [Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois]. And, that mean of two thousand physicians, I was the hea--for two years, I mean, you go through a rank. It's a whole eight year process. You start off as a secretary, to treasurer, then vice chief, then chief, then past pre-chief. But, for ten years I was the--part of that being the head person, being the head physician that interacted with administration. And, was basically the physician that sat on the board that advocated for the whole medical staff. So, that's one position. Other position that I've been is president of the whole alumni association of the medical school. Which is like, over fifty thousand alumni, and I've been actively involved in that. Story_ID: 156279 Speaker 1: I noticed Minority Affairs Advisory Committee, why--and you're still a part of that now. Is that correct? Speaker 2: That is correct. Speaker 1: Okay. Tell me why you think that's one of the things that is important to you. Speaker 2: Even though I've been blessed and probably, stupid enough to that, that when I hit my head, I still figure out a way to get to the other side. I never let the obstacle--a lot of people hit their head and they just turnaround and walk away, and they don't wanna deal with it. And, I know a lot of people that never lived up to their full potential because society beats on 'em so much that they leave the ring. And, so, you know, like I said, I've been blessed. And, blessed in being a little stupid. But, some people just get too sensitive about it and they let the world dictate--when I look in the mirror, I define the mirror. Some people let the mirror define them. And, so, because of some people I know that don't live up to their potential is that I go out of my way to see if I can make it much more of an even playing field. That they don't have to go through obstacles. They can walk down the street, a straight street, just like their counterparts of other ethnic group, whether than to go through curves and backdoors and alleys to try to get to the same place, even though they are, they're their equal. Story_ID: 156280 Speaker 1: And, is there any other position that you held that you felt, well, of course, all of them were important, but, something that was really--that hit home for you that you really enjoyed? Or, felt that was very important? Speaker 2: Well, I--when I first started going to the national meetings of orthopaedic surgeons, when the African Americans, and this is nationally, we'd get together. The people at Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], the chairman at Howard, which was the only black African American chairman, would rent a hotel room and then it might be fifteen people there. This is like the, the early '80s [1980s]. So, there were not many national, just like I mentioned, no--I didn't know of any African American neurosurgeons, but I'm sure there were one or two around then. There were very few Afro American orthopaedic surgeons. Chicago [Illinois], fortunately, there were a couple here like, [HM] Carlton West and others that were there. But, there were nationally, there were probably less than fifty. Fewer than that were people that participated in the upper level of the Academy of Orthopaedics [sic, American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons]. And, so there were very few people at the meeting. And, so, it got larger and then we ultimately in the '90s [1990s] got to be a critical mass 'til we said, "Hey, we outta do something to make orthopaedics more diverse." And, so, I was in the initial group of planners to come up with a national organization to promote diversity in orthopaedics. And, and it was a three prong mission to, one, increase the pipeline of people going into orthopaedic surgery. Two, is to promote patient care so that there's not so many disparities of what minorities get and what the majority get. And, the third thing, was to actual promote research to solve some of the problems that are unique to minority groups. So, that was our approach. And, so, we planned an organization from scratch. Seeing that our academy was based here in Chicago, our national office, I was really kind of a conduit as far as getting it incorporated and everything else, 'cause I was physically here in Chicago. And, so, even though our spiritual leader was a guy name Gus White [HM Augustus White III], who's still around, who've been interviewed here at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], who was the one that really was kind of the initial spiritual leader. He ended up being the president initially. And, because all the work--'cause I was really more the worker bee and he was the spiritual leader. And, I was really the worker bee, I ended up being the next president. And, because I was really the worker bee, I ended up serving like, I think he was president for three years, and I think I was president for seven or eight years. Speaker 1: What is the name of (simultaneously)? Speaker 2: It's the J. Robert Gladden Society. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, J. Robert Gladden is an orthopaedic surgeon who was at Howard, who ended up being the first African American that was board certified in orthopaedics. And, so, that's why that's the name. Story_ID: 156281 Speaker 1: All right, and, the credentialing committee; now, I know that's pretty important. Tell me about your role there and what do you actually do as a head of that committee? Speaker 2: I'm still (laughter), unfortunately intimately involved in, now that I think about it, I'm the only African American that's ever been involved in it. What that committee does, when you apply for privileges at a hospital, people don't know this, but the ultimately privilege is given by the board of directors. Which are usually business people or lawyers or other--just like any corporation theoretically the board of directors dictates the corporate policies. So, but, the credentials committee is the one that you bring your credentials to, they review it, and then they make the recommendation of whether you can come on staff or not. And, so they're, they're the gatekeepers. And, so, I basically, you know, and every year there's probably a couple of hundred people, you know, in different departments, I mean, this is anybody that gets on the hospital staff [at Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] in any department, and they have to go through the committee that I run. Speaker 1: And, the oversight committee; you're still involved in that as well. Speaker 2: Yes. Yes. And, that has to do with, that's--the oversight committee, I'm involved in a couple of 'em, but the one I think you're alluding to, has to do with diversity here at Northwestern [University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois]. We now have, actually an office of diversity and culture affairs which is now at the level of it, an associate dean. And, so, we're kind of his advisor--number one, we were the committee, that diversity committee you alluded earlier was the one that said, "Hey, we need a, we need an academic department that's gonna be responsible to the need to diversity." And, that's, once again, I have--my thought of diversity has noth--not only to do with ethnicity. It has to do with all the groups that are discriminated, whether it be your ethic group, whether it be your sexual orientation, whether it be being handicapped, obese. I mean, when you say diversity, or rural Caucasian America, at Northwestern, is a minority. And, so, to me diversity is just not the color of your skin. Now, having said that, we thought we needed a committee to keep it from being Presbyterian, Anglo-Saxon, and allowing Indians, and Asians, and Hispanics and other groups to come to the table. And, so, this oversight group is kind of an advisory group to make sure that that remains part of the mission of the school and in the forefront. Story_ID: 156282 Speaker 1: And, now, as a board member of the Northwestern Healthcare Corp [Northwestern Memorial Healthcare Corporation, Chicago, Illinois]. Tell me about that. Speaker 2: Well, you know, the medicine, especially in this new age of the Patient Protection Affordable Act [sic, Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act], which is the name it should be called whether than just saying it's the president ["Obamacare"]. The president [HM Barack Obama] can't--he can recommend that, but he can't institute that without both the American public and [U.S.] Congress going along with it. Even though there's a vocal minority that constantly wants to change it. But, having said that, the Northwestern Healthcare Corporation is the entity that the hospital [Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], the medical staff, the outside clinics, is to really, the corporate head basically that runs all these separate entities. 'Cause the hospital is just one part of it. The physicians are one part of it. The enterprises, the clinics are another part. And, this is the entity that runs them all. Story_ID: 156283 Speaker 1: So, now, along with all of these positions that you have, you're an attending. And, tell me what does that mean to be an attending in orthopaedic surgery? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I have teaching responsibilities. But, attending means that I treat patients and I operate. And, that's what I do. I mean, actually, I would probably venture to say 80 to 85 percent of my time is treating patients. And, only 15 percent of my time is on research, education, lecturing or these committees you talk about. Speaker 1: I see. And, I do notice that you have written a lot of articles. Or, there's a lot of publications, and going back--well, let me ask you, what do you think--because I see a number, a number of articles, how do you chose the articles that you write about? And, well, just explain about how you decide what you're gonna write about. Or, what is needed to be written about. I guess, I'm sure there's a need. But, just explain about the different articles that you have published. Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'm not in a situation where you publish or perish, which is kind of the normal academic situation that's you're actually forced to do research, and forced to do publishing. Actually, most of the things, like I mentioned about me getting a fellowship and other things, were based on the fact that nobody else actually does them. They just treat patients and they operate. And, orthopaedics by large is not a very academic discipline of medicine. It's not, like, say transplant surgery where there's a lot of basic signs that has to occur before you could do a heart transplant. Orthopaedics, you break your bone, you put a plate and screws in it, you tell 'em don't go to physical therapy, and you're done. There's not a whole lot of scientific--most orthopaedic surgeons don't do research. I would venture to say, it's probably less than two to three percent. And, one of our arguments or one of the things initiative at an over, over the side--overlaying organization is to try to get more orthopaedics scientist. Now, having said that, the articles choose me, I don't choose the article. It goes back to my basic premise, if I see a situation and I try to analyze it, and if it, if I come up with a solution that I think is unique, then I test my theory and then I publish my results. So, the article actually choose me, I don't choose it. Story_ID: 156284 Speaker 1: One thing I wanted to ask you about is, you have license in a number of states, and that's not usual for a physician so, tell me the states that you are licensed in, and why? Speaker 2: In Illinois, because I practice here and I trained here, 'cause you do it during your residency. Once again, I had to even supplement my income during residency so I used to moonlight in Gary, Indiana. And, so, I have an Indiana license, 'cause on weekends I used to work in the emergency room, 'cause I had a family during my residency; in order to support my family. I did my fellowship in California, so, I needed to have a California license during my fellowship. And, I was head physician for the '84 [1984] Olympic Team [1984 Summer Olympics, Los Angeles, California] in the [United States] Olympic Training Center that's in [Colorado Springs] Colorado. And, so, I spent a lot of time during my Olympic experience in Colorado, so, I needed a Colorado license. Story_ID: 156285 Speaker 1: Okay. So, now, going back to talking about your publications. There was a publication that you wrote about experience in Ethiopia. So, you went--would you like to talk about that? Speaker 2: Yes. That--this--that was a time, I think, it was the late '80s [1980s]. I forget the exact time. But, it was a time during one of the major famines in Ethiopia. And, once again, I don't watch a lot of TV, but it impacts me like it impacts everybody else. And, for me to see kids starving to death, and not do anything was not part of my nature. So, I decided that I was going to go to Ethiopia to do what I could to help out. Now, having said that, the backdrop during that period of time is, they were starting to turn into communist government. And, the United States had no diplomatic relationship with Ethiopia during that time. Just like we're doing Somalia now. And, so, I decided to go and I made some contacts 'cause I knew they had, Addis Ababa [University School of Medicine, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia] had a medical school. So, I made some contacts, and anyway, I decided I was gonna go. So, I didn't need any--I had to have a passport because I had to go through Germany. But, I didn't need any clearance from the State Department [United States Department of State] there. So, I went to Jeddah [Saudi Arabia], Jeddah in Saudi Arabia. And, then from Jeddah, I hopped to the plane that had Addis Ababa [Ethiopia], and I went to work for, I think, about a month. Interestingly is, I had to live in the hospital 'cause they were undergoing war. And, I remember one night I was just tired of being in the building and so I walked outside. All of a sudden, these guys come up with me with automatic weapons like you would find in Israel getting off the plane. And, they started hollering and screaming at me. Of course, I didn't know what they was saying. And, I started talking I said, "Hey, I don't know what you're saying." They coming up here putting a gun in my face, and I'm hearing gun shots. And, one of the guy--you could see a lightbulb goes off. He say, "God, he must not be African. He don't sound like us." And, he points and he says, "You better go back up in the hos"--'cause they had a curfew at night and the whole bit. And, he said, "You better got back up there." So, they let me go. And, I never left the hospital again (laughter), until I got ready to go and leave the country. I did though, I must admit, I did--one of the doctors lived up near the Blue Nile [River], and in some of rural areas. So, one day, on the weekend he came with his car, and he took me up. So, I got to see some of the, you know, places where they were doing some of the digs for original man and those kinda things in Ethiopia. But, by and large, I was in the hospital 24/7. Now, coming back, I went back through, I made a mistake of going back through Rome [Italy]. 'Cause there's a relationship between Italy and Ethiopia that goes back to [Benito] Mussolini and World War II. So, anyway, I went back, 'cause I wanted to see Rome, I went back through Rome; went from Rome to Germany. I get off the plane in Germany, the State Department finally figured out where I was, 'cause I had to use my passport going through Italy. So, I get stopped, and they say, "What you"--you know, this is before 9/11 [September 11, 2001] and terrorist--"What are you doing in Ethiopia?" And, so, they stopped me from getting on my flight back to the United States. They made me stay for about thirty-six hours, where they sit there and try to figure out what I was doing in Ethiopia, with no government approval. And, so, they finally realized, they said, "You probably just stupid and went." And, they let me come back home. Because they, you know, they thought I had some subversive reason for going there, which I didn't. And, so they let me hop on the plane a day and a half later and landed. I got outta there. Story_ID: 156286 Speaker 1: So, what was your article about? That you wrote about there [in Ethiopia]? Speaker 2: It had to do with how to take care of people that were in a war situation with none of the modern conveniences. I mean, we didn't have x-ray. We didn't have sterile equipment. We had flies flying around the room. I mean, it was, it was something unacceptable even for your kitchen or your bathroom. You could not have visualized the situation that we were taking care of people in. And, you know, people were just packed in. I thought County [Cook County Hospital, later John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] was bad during the time I was there. I mean, you go in a war, there's a hundred people. There was no food. So, if they didn't have a family member that came in and brought 'em food, then they didn't eat. You know, it wasn't a hospital the way we think of a hospital. And, so, once again, I got more out of the trip then I gave. I mean, it gave me a better perspective of how most of the world lives and how fortunate and blessed we are, no matter what our station is in America, than some of the third world countries. Story_ID: 156287 Speaker 1: Can we talk just a minute about orthopaedic surgery as far as what people are doing today? Its knee repla--joint replacements, knee replacements are a big deal, hip replacements. And, can you talk about how it has advanced from when you first started 'til now? Speaker 2: Well, actually, they just started doing total joints. You mentioned total joints for arthritis. They just started in--when I started my residency [at Cook County Hospital, later John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] it had just started. So, prior to that in medical school [at Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], and even at the--most of my residency, most people got arthritis, got a wheelchair, the cane, and they sat down. And, at sixty-five they was old and by seventy they was dead. I mean, you know, that's why sixty-five now is the new forty-five, because now people don't give up on life at sixty-five because the parts wear out. Now we can replace the parts when they were out--wear out. So, there--I just mentioned my fellowship [at National Athlete Health Institute, Inglewood, California] and the reason that I was able to start a practice and be at an outstanding institution was I brought a unique skill that was cutting edge in the late '80s [1980s]. And, it was easy to build up a practice, despite people prejudice as a bias because they need that skillset. And, one of the unique things about medicine is that it's always evolving. You know, whether you're talking about, you know, doing cardiac stints for people with heart problems now versus a triple bypass. Whether you're talk about some of the microscopic back surgery. I mean, there's all kinda unique things that are happening. Medicine is advancing in every way, and the only problem with medicine that might limit us in the advancement is the fact that we're a large portion, what we're 17 percent now, the gross national product. And, one of these things with this political argument is that, who's gonna fund it. And, if you don't fund research or innovation, then you won't have innovation. Story_ID: 156288 Speaker 1: Do you find, well, you said that you've always had a skillset that people needed and wanted. But, are more and more African Americans utilizing knee repl--joint replacements than before? Speaker 2: Well, to answer your questions, more utilize it but percentage-wise, we're still--there's a big disparity, and I actually review articles as part of our national publication. So, I get to see the raw data before, and get to decided, help decided what articles are published and not published. And, I can tell you there's a lot of data that shows that it's probably less than 50 percent if you compare with a Hispanic or an African American with the same medical problem get a total joint versus a Caucasian--I won't say majority because pretty soon they could be the minority. But, you know, by 19--well, 2040 they'll be the minority. The white society now is twice as likely to get it versus somebody that's a minority group like an African American or Hispanic. Speaker 1: And, do you have any thoughts of why? Speaker 2: Everything is impacted by people's attitudes and biases. And, we all have conscious and unconscious biases. I do. I do. So, all of us do. The majority of us don't work at try to change 'em. That's the problem. We don't accept--we think we know the right way, and we don't. And, you know, only God is the one that knows the right way. We just, we're just vehicles walking around here. But, having said that, is that most people don't accept--don't even realize they have a bias. And, that bias impacts other people. It's like that crash theory. Is that the unintended consequences, you might say, "Well, it's just me and I believe that." Ultimately, it affects your neighbor. And, I am because you are. And, if you're in bad shape, then I'm gonna be in bad shape. Story_ID: 156289 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about, specifically about knee replacement surgery. How long does this type of replacement last for a person? Speaker 2: We always throw out the thing about fifteen years. But, you gotta keep in mind, everything the doctor says is like talking to an actuary. We have the me--we have this big bell shape curve, and every time we mention a number, we're talking about the metal bell shape curve. So, that automatically means there's people on the--it could last twenty-five, thirty years, or there's people that could last a year. And, we actually, can't predict, we can tell you percentage wise where you might fall. But, if you ask me, can we predict whether it lasts a year or twenty-five years, we can't. 'Cause you're an individual one. Story_ID: 156290 Speaker 1: Dr. Hill, is there anything else that you wanna talk about that we have not talked about? Speaker 2: Yeah. I guess, I would say that it disappoints me that people take themselves outta the game. And, if you let the world define you, you'll always do what the world says. And, historically the world, especially if you're on the lower economic rung, socio-economic rung, the world has not been very nice to you. So, if you let them define who you're gonna be and what 'cha gonna get, then you're already behind the eight ball. And, everybody can leav--live their dream. It might not come out the way you want it. 'Cause God don't give you what you ask for, he gives you what you need. But, you gotta put some--the free will part of it, is you gotta give the effort. And, if you give the effort at some point you're gonna either go over that obstacle, under that obstacle, around the obstacle, or just like how molecules change, you can go through the obstacle without even breaking it. But, 'cha gotta say, you gotta envision yourself, you're gonna get there and gotta believe you can get there. And, most people, take them own selves out of the game. They don't even try. They assume that they gonna get slapped in the face. So, of course, they get slapped in the face, and don't stick their hand up to block the slap. Story_ID: 156291 Speaker 1: And, would you just talk about, a little bit about your children, because you mentioned that you do have children. And, you talked about your wife, Sandra [Hill], and tell us a little more about her life, as the doctor's wife and then about your children and who they are. Speaker 2: Well, I--my wife, you know, you always hear that story about where the wife works and puts the person through school. My wife, as I mentioned earlier, we met as an undergrad [at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois]. She actually went to graduate school. When we started having kids, she stopped working, 'cause I kind of got some of my dad's [James Hill, Sr.] attribute. She's been in social work like, Family Focus or Planned Parenthood. She's been part of those organizations. And, but, when the kids were young, she didn't work. And, so once the kids started getting outta the house, you know, college and that, then she went back to work for a period of time. And, then she worked for maybe ten years or so. And, now she's, if you ask her, "She's retired." She retired at fifty-five. And, worked from forty-five to fifty-five. So, she wasn't, she's my soulmate and companion, and friend, and lover. But, she's not my economic base (laughter). And, so, having said that, she's a good sounding board, 'cause her perspective toward life is totally different than mine. And, sometimes it nice to see somebody look at it differently. Even though, I can--I accept criticism. If I think they're wrong that doesn't mean I'm gonna change my behavior. But, she has a way of consistently criticizing me in a constructive manner that actually makes me a better person. My kids--we didn't have, start having kids until we were married about seven years, 'cause I got married so young. And, so, we got to grow up together, even though we got married young. Our oldest is a--has a degree in public health. And, she runs a--she's an executive director of a, they call it the Illinois Coalition for Maternal and Fetal Health [sic, Illinois Maternal and Child Health Coalition, later EverThrive Illinois]. But, basically, she's works in the inner cities, with un-pregnant--with high school student that have had kids. And, also, she does a lot of lobbying as far as fetal care to get money. So, she spent time both at the state legislature [Illinois General Assembly] and in [Washington] D.C. My-- Speaker 1: What is her name? Speaker 2: Her name is Janine. And, she has--and she's--she has my only granddaughter, who is Nia [ph.]. And, so, and she lives in an area, she lives in Evanston [Illinois]. I still live, actually, I never--outside of a year fellowship, I've never left Evanston since sixty-ni- since I went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] in '67 [1967]. So, she actually, recently moved back there, 'cause she wants her daughter, my granddaughter's five years old, to go to the school system in Evanston. And, she's spent more of her time there anyway. So, she might as well live there. Story_ID: 156292 Speaker 1: My kids--but, I mentioned Bill [William J.] Kane, the chairman that got me into orthopaedics who is a part--he's retired now, but who I went into practice with initially until he retired. He was an Irish Catholic. And, he had a lot of kids. Actually, I--to this day, I think, if he hadn't been in medicine, he would've been a priest. He was always, every day he went to Mass. I mean, he was hardcore. So, of course, he had to following the laws in regards to abortion and sexuality. So, he had like, I think he had nine kids. And, they all went to like, [College of the] Holy Cross [Worcester, Massachusetts] and [University of] Notre Dame [South Bend, Indiana], all these Catholic schools. He almost went bankrupt. Even though this guy is chairman of the department and make tons of money. He had tons of people in school. And, so, I observed that--and then, now, he didn't treat anybody any different and he wasn't a money, a money--somebody--some physicians who, who just gear toward money. But, you could see, he was financially stressed because of that. So, I--me being my normal observant self and nature said, "I'm gonna make my kids four years apart so, that they can all go to college and go where they want." And, it actually has turned out to be, like, a great thing. So, all my kids are four years apart; the three. Story_ID: 156293 Speaker 1: And, the last one actually, and he knows and everybody else, we actually adopted, 'cause we--my wife [Sandra Hill] really wanted a son. And, also, we always said, we were gonna adopt. So, we actually adopted the last one as a new born. But, they're all exactly four years apart. The older kid who initially thought she wanted to go into medicine, actually go into [University of] Michigan [Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan]'s six year medical program out of high school. Which would've--out of state is totally, ta--no tuition, it's free. She got in and decided, naw, I don't--I wanna go to undergrad. I wanna go to Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.]. And, of course, she go in, but of course, I have to (laughter) pay for her at Georgetown. So, I went from undergrad and graduate school being free to me paying everything. So, that deal of them being four years apart. So, and she had no pressure, 'cause I promised them all that I would pay, they wouldn't have any loans, that I would pay for their undergrad career. So, she went to Georgetown. The second daughter is Melanie, who now, who has a M.B.A. from Kellogg [School of Management, Chicago, Illinois], Northwestern's Business School and is actually works for P and G [Procter and Gamble] in Cincinnati [Ohio], and is one of the product managers for Cascade Dishwashing Soap. And, she, she went to Stanford [University, Stanford, California]. So, she went totally the opposite direction. And, my youngest, who I mentioned, is Ryan, who's a boy. And, he, he's in and out of school. He never finished but he wanted to go to a historical black college. So, he actually spent time down at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. And, I just wanna mention, from all four of 'em, my wife, typically me analyze everything. My wife, and the kids, they all gave me one gift. The older kid gave me the gift of tolerance. And, meaning, she's just like me, nature wise. She doesn't, she has her own mind, even when she was a little kid. And, so, and if you said, "No," and she thought it was yes, she didn't back down no matter what her station. And, I guess, now being on the other side seeing her, she let me accept people with differences and not try to put my will, 'cause I tend to be very strong willed. So, I've learned, that if somebody feel strongly, you can offer advice, but you don't try to direct their life. The second daughter, the gift she gave me was the gift of forgiveness. I won't go into detail, but she did something major which was underhanded and when found out about it, I mean, she apologized and came forward. I mean, it was, it was one of those teary family things. And, my wife wanted some punishment and I, I, you know, at long as she ultimately came--was truthful about it, I said, let's let it go, and let's go on, and not keep bringing up the past. And, the interesting things is, the reason I say that, I was thinking about the gifts I got from one--kids one day, and this happened maybe ten years ago. And, a month after it happens, it's like it never happened. You know, like they talk about God not remembering your thing--I actually had forgot that I--that she had even done it. So, I really did learn what true forgiveness meant from her. And, from my son, I got the gift of, you just take people where they at. And, you support 'em and you nurture 'em, you never give up on 'em. But, you gotta accept that you can't make people into what they want until they make that decision. So, I learned that from him. My wife gave me the platform of love. Even though we have our things, and I've done some things. So, I'm not without sin, is that the constant is, is she might disagree with everything but at the end of the day, if that's the way it's gonna be, she supports it with love. Story_ID: 156294 Speaker 1: Would you talk a little bit about your relationship with [HM] Augustus White, Dr. White? Speaker 2: Well, as I mentioned, he's kind of the revered figure in orthopaedics as far as African Americans concerned because, you know, he's done a lot more first than I have. I mean, he was, you know, the first one at Stanford's Medical School [Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California]. He was the first one at Yale's [Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut], did his residency at Yale. He was the first one to be chairman of a major part at Harvard [Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts]. So, I mean, he's got a lot of firsts. But, he's also down to earth. And, like I said, he was actually the spiritual leader to say, "Hey, we outta give back." Even though, like I said, I've been fairly successful in a white-dominated field and a white environment. And, he has too at Harvard, much more than I have. He really was a spiritual things that we need to give back and we need to be more supportive in an organized fashion rather than individually maybe helping one or two people who--we need to find a way to keep the door open for everybody. And, so, I think he's a revered figure. Everybody knows him. But, also, he's very down to earth. He's not somebody that's condescending that you can always call him up and responses and gives advice. Speaker 1: And, you, did you co-author an article with him, or a publication? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And, what was that? Speaker 2: It has to do with culturally competent care, which is a derivative of health care disparities and diversity. They kinda go together. And, culturally competent care mean, you know, each culture has a different need and a different approach to medicine. And, and in order for a physician, any physician that says that they treat everybody the same is treating some people more than he needs to threat 'em, and some people less than they need to be treated. 'Cause you gotta individualize the treatment. People might have the same medical problems, but their wishes and their desires, and what they bring to the table is totally different. And, you gotta response to them, it's gotta be patient centered, not physician centered. And, so culture competent care, especially minority and ethnic groups, they don't get physicians that are responsive to their needs. And, so, culturally competent care means, that you, you treat 'em as a person not a disease state. And, you treat 'em, just like I mentioned my son, you treat 'em where they're at, rather than where you think they should be. Story_ID: 156295 Speaker 1: And, what about [HM Dr.] Carlton West? Speaker 2: Carlton West is, a kind of revered figure locally 'cause Carlton--actually, interestingly, was the second resident behind Gus White [HM Augustus White] at Yale [School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut]. So, Carlton West goes back to doing his residency at Yale. And, he came back to Chicago and did Michael Reese [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] which has now been closed. Was--I mentioned the South Side [of Chicago, Illinois] and the fairly prominent black middle-class, not quite like Atlanta [Georgia], but that's where the black middle--the Pill Hill [Chicago, Illinois], the Chatham [Chicago, Illinois], that's where the black class, and they went to Michael Reese. And, Carlton West was the orthopaedic surgeon for the black middle-class and the black middle--African American orthopaedic surgeon in the city, of any great note. And, so, you know, quite naturally, actually for a time, when I started, Carlton had a partner name Moss. But, the three of us, were the three only African American orthopaedic surgeons in the city. So, quite naturally, we interacted. Story_ID: 156296 Speaker 1: I did want to ask you about the Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago [RIC, Chicago, Illinois]. That was started by the Kennedys [ph.], is that right? Speaker 2: Yeah. That's right. Speaker 1: Okay. And, what was it? Henry Betts? Speaker 2: Henry Betts. Speaker 1: Okay. Because you're still involved with them now, so just tell me a little bit about that. Speaker 2: Well, you know, the Rehabilitation of Chicago ends up with people with disabilities and problems with disability. And, quite naturally, for instance, you ask me questions about total joints. There was a period of time that people post-operatively have their surgery then they go over to RIC for their rehabilitation. So, and physically it's right next to Northwestern [Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois]. And, it's part of the Northwestern system, and so, since I've been on staff, I've always been on staff at RIC in case I needed to go over there for an orthopaedic problem. Story_ID: 156297 Speaker 1: Is there anything that you have not done that you want to do in life? Speaker 2: If I would pass this instant, I can say that it's been a life well-lived. That I've done the majority of things. On the other hand, the glass is never full. And, you know, I got, I got some things in my mind, like I wanna go work in Mumbai [India] with untouchables in India. I mean, I've been to Africa probably three or four times. So, my next volunteer time, is gonna be at the most populous country in the world, which is not China, its India. And, I wanna work with untouchable. Another thing I wanna do is, I really want to--I've been to the Jerusalem [Israel] as--for medical reasons. But, I actually wanna go there for spiritual reasons. You know, the, you know, three religions were based there. And, even though we get this distorted view of religion from the press, and also doctors or scientists for instance, have this line between religious and science like they're two separate entities. There all the same. A person is not only a physical person, they're an emotional person. And, so, I want to kind of do some self-study myself. But, I wanna do it in the lab. You know, you do science in the lab at the hospital. I wanna do it in the lab of spirituality. And, the last thing I wanna do, that really comes--I won't say last thing--one of the things that's on my, on my menu at the height of the list. It would be, I wanna go to the Galapagos Island [Ecuador] to really look, you know, get a little bit better appreciation of animals and how they relate to the world in general. We tend to think of everything evolving around people but, you know, there were dinosaurs, there's tons of animals ain't here, people might not be here. Speaker 1: When you look at, look back at your life, what stands out the most to you? Speaker 2: That I've been blessed and God gave me what I needed, not necessarily everything I wanted, but he definitely gave me what I needed. Story_ID: 156298 Speaker 1: And, I know you have many, many, years to live, but what do you want your legacy to be? Speaker 2: That he made a difference. Nothing more, nothing less. And, like I said, I think I am because we are. So, if I don't make a difference, I'm only hurting myself in the long run. Story_ID: 156299 Speaker 1: This is going to be viewed by many generations. And, if you could send a message to the future generations, what would it be? Speaker 2: That we're all part of the human community. We might have different strengths, different weaknesses, different endowed attribute and different disabilities, but we're all of the same DNA, and of all, all the same people. So, even though, yeah, I'm highlighting a people that have not had the same opportunities, they're still part of the whole, the whole mass of humanity. And, sometimes people get hung up, 'cause, I think, I went to Easter Island once on an archeological dig as a physician. One of the things that struck me is that genetically, they were the same people. The reason there is very few of the Mana Nuis [ph., sic, Rapa Nuis] alive is that, the people that had money wore earrings, so they turned into long ears, like some women that wear earring. And, then the people to didn't have money, didn't have earrings, they were short ears. Ultimately, the long ears and the short ears had this war. They took down all the trees, they killed each other. They destroyed their society, and they genetic--Rwanda, genetically they're the same people. And, so, I guess, my point is, is that we spend more time as a humanity looking for differences, than seeing what's right in front of our face, which is 99.9 percent of our commonality. And, so, I think, people should spend more time, not looking at the difference but looking at what they have in common. Life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. Speaker 1: All right. Great. Well, Dr. I appreciate your time, you know, it's been wonderful to hear your story and I know it's gonna be inspirational to many, many people in the future. So, thank you for taking time out of your busy schedule. Speaker 2: Oh, this has been a pleasure, 'cause everybody--me being kinda humble, I really--if it wasn't for this setting, this is probably something, go to my grave that would never would have been said. Speaker 1: All right. Wonderful...