 Story_ID: 23613 Speaker 1: Alright my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewing today with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please. Speaker 2: Sure, it's Lovell Allan Jones, that's L-O-V-E-L-L, A-L-L-A-N, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: Alright and sir what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Date of birth is January 12th, 1949. Place of birth is Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Alright and sir what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: Depends on the time of day. I'm Director of the Dorothy I. Height Center for Health Equity and Evaluation Research, Professor of Health Disparative Research, Professor of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Research Professor at University of Houston, main campus. I can stop there. Speaker 1: Alright, well some of these other titles. Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION] Speaker 1: Okay, well before we go into depth there are--what is today's date? I'm sorry. Speaker 2: It's August 14, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are at the University of Houston--nope. This is Tuesday so we're at the University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center. Story_ID: 23614 Speaker 1: Alright, okay now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we ask as a warm-up. Speaker 2: Five lightweight. Speaker 1: They are, and they only require a short answer. But this is how we do this, so-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first question is do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: Let's see, do I have a favorite food? I guess I have a favorite category, and that's probably Chinese food. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite color? Speaker 2: Blue. Speaker 1: Alright, a favorite time of the year. Speaker 2: Fall. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination. Speaker 2: Favorite destination, I would say probably the big island of Hawaii. Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is do, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: If you don't care about who gets the credit, you accomplish a lot. Story_ID: 23615 Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Full name is Georgia, Georgia Beverly Lockhart Jones, G-E-O-R-G-I-A, B-E-V-E-R-L-Y, L-O-C-K-H-A-R-T, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her date of birth is February 28th, 1914. Place of birth was Walker, Louisiana. Speaker 1: Alright, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family? How far back can you trace them and what were they doing? Speaker 2: Probably all the way, at least- pretty far back. My mother's family, at least in terms of the Lockhart's on that side, I can trace them all the way back to Wales, United Kingdom. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And on her--that's on her father's side. On her mother's side, probably back to at least plantations in Louisiana. Speaker 1: Okay. So now pre-Civil War days then. Speaker 2: Right up till the Civil War, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. The plantations near Walker? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Now what's the story about Wales? This is--I take it these are non-black people. Speaker 2: Yeah. Actually as the story goes, at least as passed down, on my, on my, on my mother's father's side, the family actually came from Wales, Wales, Scottish. Traveled along the Spanish Trail and actually Arsan Lockhart, who we can trace back to a relationship between one of the Lockhart sons and a woman who grew up on the Allan Plantation who was a Native American by the name of Jennifer. So her last name actually I guess you'd call her Jennifer Allan, whose offspring was Arsan Lockhart. Speaker 1: What, what was that name? I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Arsan, Arsan. Speaker 1: Arsan. Speaker 2: A-R-S-A-N. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Who had somewhere between 12, 14 children, of which my grandfather was one of them. Speaker 1: Now did he have his children with a black woman or-- Speaker 2: No. His children were with, were with also Native American. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But they were raised, from what I gather in, in Louisiana it was better to be black than be Indian. And so--but all of the, all of the, all of my grandfather's brothers and sisters with the exception of one, married African American women. Speaker 1: And what was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Grandfather's name was Eddie Lockhart. Story_ID: 23616 Speaker 1: So eth--I mean well I know we're not--race is a kind of a--but he would be I guess an Indian I guess by, or, or, or, or Welsh and Indian. Speaker 2: Welsh/Indian or something along-- Speaker 1: I guess by biological descendant or racial. Speaker 2: Genetically I guess, you know by that--but Speaker 1: --but he, he passed for black. Speaker 2: But he considered himself African American. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Or black or colored or whatever the term was during that time. Speaker 1: Well I thought it was curious that you said that it's better to be a black person in Louisiana in those days-- Speaker 2: At least that's what he felt, or at least that was the perception. Speaker 1: And what would that, what would that time period be, like in the 1880's or-- Speaker 2: He was born in, in 1888. Speaker 1: Okay. And his, his brothers married black too you say. Speaker 2: His brothers, right. The only one--there were actually a set of Lockhart's from the same tree that are in St. Thomas in the Virgin Islands. Speaker 1: Now they--did they--did the Lockhart's go from Wales to the Virgin Islands then to-- Speaker 2: No, they actually split. And there actually was one of the brothers and this is all I guess stories that were handed down, there is a, a I guess a branch actually ended up in Texas. There is a Lockhart, Texas, which is probably about maybe a little over 100 miles from here. And that was from a branch that actually ended up in Ohio that moved down here. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so they recorded all this. In fact I have--a lot of this was recorded on paper bags and I got those bags several years ago from a cousin that lived in Berkeley [California] when I was living in Berkeley at the time. And had her--or she allowed me to transcribe it. So Arsan actually was actually raised by a black family because of being the product of an illicit relationship. The Lockhart family gave him to, to a family to be raised. Speaker 1: Now did they give him to a, a very light skinned black family that, that he would look similar to? Or did they-- Speaker 2: I never, you know I never have seen pictures of his, his parents. I don't know if there were ever any, any pictures taken of them. All I know that he was given to a black family to raise. Speaker 1: Okay and they, they raised him in a, a black community I suppose. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And you know his mother went on to marry a black gentleman by the name of Brown. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And subsequently raised and I guess got him back and subsequently raised him. And so I'm related to a whole group of Browns through that relationship. I think she had somewhere around 12 children in addition to Arsan. Speaker 1: Okay. So Arsan [Lockhart] is your-- Speaker 2: Is my great Speaker 1: Great grandfather. Just one great? Speaker 2: Just my great grandfather, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 23617 Speaker 1: Now did you know your grandfather? Speaker 2: Yes I did. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: That was Eddie Lockhart. Speaker 1: Okay Eddie Lockhart, okay. Now what did he do for a living? Speaker 2: He was an engineer at Exxon Mobile. In fact the Lockhart's, the brothers, were a very unusual group I guess during their period of time. Gene Lockhart actually and his wife helped set up the educational schools in Denham Springs, Louisiana, and he was a successful businessman. One of his brothers, I can't think of the first name now but actually designed and installed the original water and sewer system in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and the stories were when, you know, they had a, a main break or something because they weren't--they were never, the original lines were never put into drawings. They had to come and get him to help them locate where, where they were to repair them. Speaker 1: Okay, alright. Okay so, so there was no schematic. He, he had to--he was the only one that knew. Speaker 2: It was all in his brain. Speaker 1: Do you know his name? Speaker 2: No, I don't, but he was a Lockhart. Speaker 1: He was a brother of your-- Speaker 2: He was a brother of Ed, of Eddie. Speaker 1: Eddie, okay your grandfather. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So he's a great uncle. Speaker 2: Right. Okay. Story_ID: 23618 Speaker 1: What about your grandmother on that side? Speaker 2: My grandmother, her mother was Martha Clark. Clark was her second marriage and I forgot what her, what her previous married name was. But the unusualness of, of Martha was--that has been passed down to me to some extent, in that I have a good friend, Mary Clara King who's a pretty well known geneticist at University of Washington in Seattle. And Mary Clara and I were graduate students together. And in looking at and doing serial blood type, it came up with an interesting allele that is only found in Aborigines. And as the story--I went back and quizzed some of my family and as the story goes, is that there was a group of slaves that actually were brought in through Mexico. And I've never been able to verify it other than just having this allele, is that, you know the slave ships at one time after the early 18th century, there was embargo in bringing in new slaves into the United States. And consequently there were still the ban and that they came from wherever they could get them. Speaker 1: Now there's a story I've heard now about four times doing these interviews about people in Louisiana or Arkansas who are descendants of people from, what is that, not Zanzibar, but what's that--Madagascar. Speaker 2: Madagascar, yeah. Speaker 1: Madagascar, yeah. Which first time I heard it I said mm, you know. But after I heard it two or three times, you know, you start thinking, you know why would they have such a story passed down? Because most people have no story about where their ancestors came from, country. But these people were, were very--had a tradition where they were from Madagascar and so you know it's, it's, it certainly is possible. They sailed around all over the world. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And so as you said that may have been the--maybe a pathway for-- Speaker 2: You know it's a long way to come, but you never, you never know. Speaker 1: The money involved. Speaker 2: Money's involved, you know. You get them where you can. Speaker 1: Yeah so you know who knows? So that's, that's interesting to put out there. We'll see what, you know, maybe somebody will figure it out. Speaker 2: Right. But you know like I said, I've never, I've never gone back to, to verify other than just a story. An idea that is, is something that is unusual. Speaker 1: Who tells the story? I'm sorry. Who tells the story? Speaker 2: It actually came from my, my great grandmother. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Grandma Martha. Speaker 1: And see in some way sounds too elaborate to make up. Speaker 2: And she was an interesting woman. There's stories of her asking, actually casting curses on individuals and it actually happening. And so I heard those as a young kid and I was--when she said to do something, I was always very mindful. Speaker 1: Now did she consider herself a practitioner of hoodoo or, or-- Speaker 2: She never said. Speaker 1: I think that's what they call it in New Orleans [Louisiana]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: South Carolina, they call it hoodoo. Speaker 2: Well yeah, yeah well in, in--well you know if you look at--and part of my work and the reason why it's fascinating to me is working with another researcher by the name of Fatimah Jackson who's one of the few black biological anthropologists in the country, who's been working on documenting the slave trade for a number of years. Historically there are only three points, major points of entry in the United States for slave trade. It was the Carolina coast, the Chesapeake Bay and the Mississippi Delta. And those three areas had distinct populations that they brought into the United States. That's why in terms of New Orleans, you know it's the only place that you will have a major constituent of, of the whole voodoo trade from Vrooms out of Africa. Or you know you look at certain cultures and characteristics along the Carolina coast that also go up to Washington but you don't find in Louisiana and Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And it's because of the populations. When they came in, they came in with different cultures, different languages, different ways they practice their religion. The whole idea of the blues coming out of, out of Mississippi and the Delta that that was actually from a large group that landed or were brought in to the Mississippi Delta that were Muslim. And if you, you listen to the blues and the Muslim called the Prayer, they're identical. Speaker 1: Well we were just saying there's a--I wouldn't think they're identical, but there's a lot of studies been done on this. There's a book called the Roots of the Blues by Samuel Charters, musicologist, who documents that same route that you're talking about and you know there have been like--even the, I think even the Burns Blues documentary touches upon it. It seems to be well known now among musicologists that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: There's a definitely a link with the string instruments and the, and the patterns. Speaker 2: But most people don't know that, outside of that realm. You know they assume that all of these individuals that were brought in were dumb, stupid and were trained to do other things, other than, you know just pick cotton and do that sort of thing. But they were very well trained individuals that brought in their own culture that lingers today in other forms. Speaker 1: Rice production, wrought iron down in Louisiana, there are a lot of these things are African. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 23619 Speaker 1: Now before we leave your, your great grandmother, is there a story about a curse she put on somebody that, that you can tell? Speaker 2: Yes. She washed clothes. That was what she did following slavery. She was born as a slave and was a, a small child I guess when slavery ended. And her trade was to wash. And so she was asked to wash certain clothing of a white plantation owner and she said I don't wash those for myself, so why should I wash this for, for your wife? And she refused. And the individual refused to accept that and began to beat her. And she turned and said to him that for every whelp on her body, his pregnant wife, the child that would be born to her, would have the same marks on the child's body. And when the child was born, they had those marks. Speaker 1: That's a creepy story. Speaker 2: That's why I minded her. When she said something I said okay. Speaker 1: That's the kind of story to tell on the back porch late at night and the kids go back in the house and--that's a good one though. So alright, now--so your--did your grandmother do the same kind of work or did she-- Speaker 2: Yeah she was a housekeeper, she was a maid. There was a Jewish family in, in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] that she worked for until she retired. Story_ID: 23620 Speaker 1: Okay. Now what did your mother [Georgia Beverly Lockhart] say about growing up? Did she grow up in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] or in Walker [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: You know I asked recently my, my aunt you know when did you, did she remember when they moved to Baton Rouge and she didn't. All they remembered was living in Baton Rouge and growing up in Baton Rouge and actually growing in an area that now is where a Catholic church and Catholic school is there in, in Baton Rouge. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: But they all knew they were born in, in Walker. The interesting thing is I was joking with her yesterday and saying when I went back to look at my mother's birth certificate, it had her being born in, in 1914, but she would always say she was born in 1917. And my, my aunt would say that she was born in 1919. And so when I was talking to her she says well, the Social Security people say that I was born in 1915. I said yeah, that's what your birth certificates says. She says but I'm going by 1919. I said okay fine. Speaker 1: Okay. So your mother's 90-- Speaker 2: She's deceased. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But, but she would be 98 today. Speaker 1: Okay. Alright now did, did she talk about growing up and what it was like for her coming up in New Orleans, I mean in Baton Rouge? Speaker 2: She, she talked about her teenage years and then when she decided to go to college and how her sisters, the three of them worked together to support her going to Southern. And I guess the three of them worked as waitresses at a cafe that wasn't too far from where they lived. But the interesting thing about, you know, my mom and her sisters and that side of the family is that it was almost parallel worlds but the parallel worlds knew each other. That is my mom knew I guess what one would call the white side of the family and in Denham Springs there was the black side of the family, the black Lockhart's on the other side had their own society. In fact my grand aunt, Gene's wife, was superintendent of the school system, black school system there. And her white counterpart was also a Lockhart, was superintendent of the white school system that was there. And I, I'll never forget calling, calling to talk to one of my cousins one time who eventually moved to, to California. And we were close in terms of proximity. I was calling her and I was saying I can hardly hear you. She says I'm under the table, you know, the white side thought the black side has gotten uppity and they're firing at each other. And so I'm staying out of the way of the bullets. Speaker 1: Wow. Speaker 2: So my, you know the insurance agent that came by the house whose last name was Allan, who was white, was a cousin that my mom knew and would say this is your cousin from such-and-such and so-and-so and I would go okay, fine. And to fast forward when my mom died and we were having her funeral, my Aunt Bott [ph.] came who was one of the Lockhart's and my grand aunt actually. My daughter looked at her because Bott was pretty light skinned, light eyes. And my, my daughter said daddy, who's this white woman sitting, you know at the funeral for, for, for grandma? And I said that's your Aunt Bott, your great great Aunt Bott and she looked and said okay. But it, it was an interesting time growing up. Given the separation but also I joked with--Louisiana had a different style of segregation. I mean it was--I wouldn't say it was not as deadly if you crossed and did the wrong thing. But because of the French background, there was a lot more interactions that took place that, you know, you may not have seen in the city or Alabama or some of the other states. Story_ID: 23621 Speaker 1: Alright now you know tell that story again. Now you got to-- Speaker 2: Okay. One day I was with one of my faculty who was a student at the time getting her degree. And she mentioned that you know, her and her mother were going to a funeral over in, in Port Allen. And her last name is Allen. And so I began to quiz her about what funeral she was going to. And as it turns out, she was going to the same funeral that my mother was going to. And in digging further into it, I found out that her great grandfather is my great grand uncle. In fact my great grand aunt Jennifer Allen is also her great grand aunt. And as it turns out, she's first cousins with Debbie Allen and Phylicia Rashad. And so that linkage all derives from the Allen plantation outside of Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Yeah it's, it is, yeah. Speaker 2: So that's--and sometimes it tends to be a very small world. Story_ID: 23622 Speaker 1: Okay now what did your mother [Georgia Beverly Lockhart] study at Southern [University]? Did she-- Speaker 2: She was a science teacher and she got her degree in, in education, secondary education. She went off and got a graduate degree. Actually went up to Pennsylvania and got a graduate degree, and-- Speaker 1: Now was this paid for by the State of Louisiana? Speaker 2: I don't know if it was paid by the state or not. I know her undergraduate degree was paid by her-- Speaker 1: Southern, some of the southern states if you qualified, you could get into a graduate school in the north, they would pay a black person to go just to keep you from you know, suing the state. Yeah that was the arrangement, Louisiana, South Carolina. Speaker 2: Yeah for my mom I don't know. But actually prior to her going to get her graduate degree, she actually taught, and that's how I came into the picture. She actually--her first job in teaching science was in northern Louisiana. So she moved away from home, moved to Delhi where she met my dad whose family lived in Tallulah, in that area in northern Louisiana. She married him, there was a war and so he went to serve overseas. She moved with him to southern California, northern California, actually San Francisco Bay area. My mom did not like California and moved back home and basically said I'm moving, you can stay in California, but I'm moving home. And she moved back and I ended up being born in, in Baton Rouge at Our Lady of the Lake Hospital. Actually the day I was born it snowed. First time it snowed in many, many years in that part of the country. Story_ID: 23623 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Yes, it's Johnnie Allan Jones, that's J-O-H-N-N-I-E, middle name A-L-L-A-N, J-O-N-E-S. Speaker 1: Okay and what is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: His date of birth is May 17, 1917 in Greenwood, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Greenwood, okay. Now what do you know about his side of the family? Speaker 2: Not as much as I know about my mom's. His dad, Max Jones, as the story goes had to leave Ohio for some reason and moved to Mississippi. We don't know what his ethnic background was or racial background, other than he had to get the hell out of Ohio. Speaker 1: Out of Ohio. So this is almost reverse migration. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: He had to move--do you know where he was in Ohio? Speaker 2: Somewhere around Dayton. Speaker 1: Okay that's actually where I'm from. Speaker 2: And there are, there are members of my, my grandfather's family that are still there. Anyway he moved and he met his wife whose last name was Schrope [ph.]. She was Native American. They--after my dad was born, they and the other ten children moved to northern Louisiana where he was involved in opening a sawmill and a grocery store. And lived there until the day he died. Speaker 1: So yeah sawmill and grocery store. Speaker 2: And a farm. Speaker 1: In what, what town was it? Speaker 2: It was between--the farm was between Delhi [Louisiana] and Tallulah [Louisiana]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The grocery store was in Delhi. Speaker 1: Delhi, and that's D-E-L-H-I? Speaker 2: Yeah, D-E-L-H-I, right. Speaker 1: Okay and Tula, T-U-L-A. Speaker 2: Tallulah, Tallulah. Speaker 1: Tallulah, okay, T-A-L-L-U-L-A-H. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Like Tallulah Bankhead. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right, now okay. Alright so, so the origins of Max Jones other than coming from around the Dayton area, you don't really-- Speaker 2: No, nobody--in fact when asked, nobody would say other than--in fact I learned that much after he died consulting some of the children of my dad's brothers. Speaker 1: And he looked like a white man? Speaker 2: Mm-hmm. Speaker 1: Alright, I mean you didn't--you know you couldn't tell. Speaker 2: Nope. Speaker 1: What about his wife? Speaker 2: His wife was Native American, very long, straight hair. Story_ID: 23624 Speaker 1: Okay, alright. So, so your, so your father [Johnnie Allan Jones], what did he say about growing up in that area? Speaker 2: He wanted to get the hell out as quick as possible. And therefore he and his younger brother, I don't know about the older brothers, joined the military and went to fight in the Pacific. And it had a lasting impact on him because one of the--my mom was a horticulturist, she liked to grow things and she liked bamboo grass as trimming. And there was always a, a major battle over the bamboo because it reminded him of the jungle in, in the Pacific and the snakes that were within that, those, that grass. And some of the--his friends who perished not from bullets, but from snake bites and that sort of thing. So bamboo was not his favorite subject. Speaker 1: Okay. Now did your, your father have a chance to go to school too, or-- Speaker 2: No. Actually he ended up coming back. He had been trained as an engineer but could not find any work after the war in that field. And actually went to work for the railroad. Worked as, worked as a porter and then actually was promoted during the latter part of his career to be manager of the food and beverage service for the Santa Fe Pacific Railroad. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And ended up working out of Houston [Texas]. So that's part of my Houston connection in that the furthest east the Santa Fe came at that time was Houston, to Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and so he would work out of Houston and travel back to, to Baton Rouge. Speaker 1: Okay so you would come sometimes to Houston with him? Speaker 2: And spend the summers here because he would switch, or he'd be switched around where the time that he would spend would be more in California than he'd be in Houston. And so for us to see him, we moved to Houston for the summer. Story_ID: 23625 Speaker 1: Okay so did he and your mother stay together or did they-- Speaker 2: They came back together, actually. They were apart for about the, I would say the first ten years of my life. They talked, communicated and then around 1959 they decided that they were better--sorry, can I stop? [PHONE RINGING] Anyway I guess they decided to get back, get back together. They decided that it was better to be together than to be apart and so in 1959 my dad moved back home. And we actually moved. It may have been coincidental. It may have been by design to some extent. But my dad moved home the, within the year after my grandmother died. I think there was not the best of relationships between my dad and my grandmother, my mom's mother. And given that she moved back home and he didn't follow her to come back, I think there was some bitterness that my grandmother held and until she was out of the picture, I think there was that barrier that was there. And once my grandmother was out of the picture, then my mom and dad got back together. Story_ID: 23626 Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' personalities, now their habits, their hobbies, how they walk, talk, look, their dispositions, who, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: I never thought about that. Well you know in terms of--in fact I don't know if I take after either. Probably my science is in terms of my mother, and the career that I've taken and the direction I've taken is probably more related to, to my mother. But I often joke, in fact I was joking the other day is that my son is a reincarnation of my dad. He buys and wears $200 pajamas. His shoes have wooden supports in them when he takes them off. He, he could pass for a model in Esquire Magazine. Me, I, you know--whatever's there. I'm not that keen too, and so seeing him is seeing my dad reincarnated because my dad was like that. And in fact my mother was just an equal in terms of clothes and shoes and, and style and, and that sort of thing. I think for a while as a youngster I, I did that. But as an adult, you know, it doesn't tickle my fancy. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I guess if you talk about laid back attitude in terms of approach to life as I think about, probably more like my dad in that manner. But if people were to see my parents today and describe them, and then see me as an adult today, they would say hmm, does he really--other than the facial features and that sort of thing, did he originally come from those two individuals? Story_ID: 23627 Speaker 1: Alright well now did you grow up in the same place, except for the summers you spent up in Delhi [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah grew up in central Baton Route on 520 (unclear) Street, right off of Government. It was an Italian grocery store that was around the corner whose kids I still know and some, some contact with. As you know to the extent the Italians in the south were not that well liked either. And so, or at least for some of them, and then around the corner was a Jewish furniture store. In fact that's where we got our first TV set from back in 1954. Speaker 1: So was the neighborhood, would you say the neighborhood was mixed? Speaker 2: No the neighbor--my neighbors, all of the neighbors except for the Italian family, that ran the grocery store and the Jewish family that ran the furniture store, were all black. Speaker 1: About--did you have any Creole neighbors? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean the--you know in, in southern Louisiana which is Baton Rouge, I mean I joked and said to people you know, when we integrated schools there, really the schools were already to some extent integrated because my elementary school, I mean we had kids who were blonde, blue eyed, were black, to kids who were very dark skinned. But we were all classified as being black or Negros or colored. It was just the, the mixture that occurred in that region of the country. Story_ID: 23628 Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Now the, the most memorable sights you know was the state capitol. We, we lived in the state capitol. Both the old state capitol and the new. The old because it was on a hill and we used to go down there roller skating and play a game of Dare because at the bottom you're, you were trying to whip around the corner and the person on the end either had to hold on for dear life or get whipped into the middle of an intersection. And so made for some interesting times. So I mean those--so those were the sights. The sounds were the music that was being played in some of the neighborhoods and corners that you'd hear musicians and that, that sort of thing. My wife's father at the time I didn't know it was going to be my wife's father, was a musician and owned the grocery store and had a band and I remember going by that store and hearing them at various times, but they were in the neighborhood. Speaker 1: So much, so different kinds of music in Louisiana. I mean a lot, lot of it sounds similar. Speaker 2: As I recall jazz, blues. Speaker 1: Blues, early rhythm and blues? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Allen Toussaint and Fats Domino, you know that's down in New Orleans, but still a lot of music in-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So what kind of music did you remember around you as much? Speaker 2: More of the blues. You know there was a hall right at the end of the street that I lived, Mason, had people congregated. And that some of the old timers would, would sit and play for different events and sometimes no events at all. Speaker 1: Okay. Well of the sights and sounds and smells? Speaker 2: The river, you couldn't avoid that. The Mississippi was just right there and the levee which was, which was right there. You know weather, hurricanes. Paula which came from the 1960, came through there, so there was a period of time that--I remember the time my mom got picked up and thrown across the yard. As I mentioned, she's a, was a horticulturist, loved to plant, and the eye of the hurricane came over, calmed the, the winds. She decided to go out and check her plants. Didn't watch the time and the wind picked up and picked her up. Speaker 1: So was she injured? Speaker 2: No, scared, not injured but as a child that stuck in my mind. Story_ID: 23629 Speaker 1: Where did you start school in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]? Speaker 2: I started, interestingly enough, I started in daycare. Mrs. Doody's Child Academy. Speaker 1: How do you spell Doody? Speaker 2: D-O-O-D-Y. Speaker 1: It's like Howdy Doody. Speaker 2: It's like Howdy Doody. And in fact my first girlfriend, which I didn't know at the time, we attended the same kindergarten and actually were in a Tom Thumb wedding in the kindergarten. Speaker 1: Were you the bride and groom? Speaker 2: The bride and groom. Then from there I went to Perkins Rowe Elementary. Speaker 1: So how do you spell that? Speaker 2: P-E-R-K-I-N-S. Speaker 1: Perkins Rowe, okay. Speaker 2: Actually my, my dog, my pet--my grandmother and my pet would walk me to school in the morning and the dog would be waiting for me in the afternoon and brought me back home. Speaker 1: What was your dog's name? Speaker 2: Ricky. Interesting story about Ricky too is that when I was a baby, I guess he thought someone was--my grandmother put me on the front porch in a bassinette and he thought that, at least as it was related to me, thought that someone was trying to take me and picked up the bassinette and took me under the house. And so everybody was roaming, looking for me until my grandmother decided to, to look under the house and she saw these eyes glaring, and then she saw the bassinette right next to him. Speaker 1: That's interesting. What kind of dog was he? Speaker 2: He was a collie. Speaker 1: A collie, okay. Speaker 2: And so from Perkins Rowe they opened up, the changed McKinley High School to an elementary school at the corner of Hayes Boulevard, I think they changed the name of it, but it was Hayes Boulevard, and Louise Street and made it an elementary school cause they built a new high school. And so I ended up going to that school. Speaker 1: What was it called? Speaker 2: It was called McKinley Elementary. Speaker 1: Okay McKinley Elementary, okay. Speaker 2: Until the sixth grade. Speaker 1: Now before we get you in junior high school, let me just ask you were there any special teachers in this, during this period of time in primary school? Speaker 2: Mr. Green, I can't think of his, his first name. And there was a woman whose name escapes me right now. But one of the unique, one of the things, I mean things that probably had a--continues to have a bearing on my life, is that I was first started--I don't know if my mom fudged or because it was, I was transferred from, from this child school to, to Perkins Rowe or she was, she was a teacher in the system. But I started kindergarten at four. Now normally you start kindergarten at five. And so I was already younger than most of the kids, in fact of all of them, in my class cause my birthday being in January and most of the cut-off, even today is, is September or later September. Speaker 1: Now were you prepared in some way to start that early? I mean were you--had, had she taught you some letters or-- Speaker 2: Yeah I knew my letters and numbers. Speaker 1: Could you read? Speaker 2: Yeah I could read as well because I was in--one of the few kids in, in Ms. Doody's preschool, I guess you'd call it preschool right now. It would be interesting to follow those kids and--I hadn't even thought about that till now. To see where they are today. But when I transferred to, to McKinley Elementary, they actually put me a grade higher. That was good and bad. The bad part about it was I was already at--stretching the max of my maturity level and it really stretched the max, putting me another grade higher. And they eventually, within a month realized, a little bit more than a month, but realized this was a big stretch for, for someone my age and in the school system that I was in. It may have worked for some other school system, but it didn't work at that time for me and so they put me back. Speaker 1: Was it problematic being--were you the smallest guy, person in the class? Speaker 2: Smallest guy, youngest guy, being a male, it was--the best thing I could say is it was interesting. But in the end, you know what happened and you know I ended up repeating some of the stuff I had already--and so it, it led for a while to a disciplinary problem. Because I got, was getting bored until my mom, my mom stepped in and said we're not gone have any of this. Story_ID: 23630 Speaker 1: What were some of the problems that tended to be, you know, ahead of everybody academically but behind them emotionally and maturity-wise? Speaker 2: Well academically getting bored. Maturity-wise and size-wise, being picked on to an extent. Plus being the child of a teacher. It's like being the child of a preacher, a minister you know. You, you, you are labeled in a certain way. And so at that point in time, my mom taught about two blocks, three--well let's say maybe a quarter of a mile from the elementary school. The junior high was right down the street. So she would drive and then instead of dropping me off, she would drive to her school and she would have a student or someone assigned to, to walk me to school and then come back to class. Eventually I didn't make it all the way there and it caught up with me. When she came looking for me and I wasn't where I supposed to be at that point in time. That lasted only a very short period. But you know it did have an impact I guess, that I, I see it with my, my grandson who is pretty advanced for his, for his years. And so in discussions with his mom, in fact in discussions with my kids and their teachers, I was always cautious about them being put into a situation, not so much academically-wise, but maturity-wise, that would create issues for me and ultimately create issues for their mom and dad. Speaker 1: Now did the school try to figure out a way to give you extra work or something to keep you-- Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: They didn't try to remedy the situation. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Except just--you had to hang in there and just-- Speaker 2: Just had to hang in there. And as I said, my mom remedied the situation. Speaker 1: Okay, discipline? Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 23631 Speaker 1: So you went on from McKinley [Elementary School] to junior high school I guess, right? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: What was the name? Speaker 2: My mom, my mom realized that I was going to have to be challenged. And the school that I was zoned to was the school that she was at and so for junior high and she realized that probably meant issues for me coming there. And so she had me tested to go to the laboratory school and the experimental school that was part of the Southern University. And so you know you had to take a test to get in. I took the test and passed it and got offered a position to go to school there. That has good points and its bad points. Good points, academically it was challenging, more so than I had before. Bad points, the only way to get there was to get up and ride a bus with college kids in the morning. College kids are interesting for a sixth, seventh grader. You learn a lot of things that you aren't supposed to learn about early in life. And so you know I did that for--rode the bus for--in the morning. Rode the bus coming back in the afternoon for about two years. My eighth grade year my mom kicked me out of the house. Speaker 1: What happened? Speaker 2: I started dating a college girl. (laughter) And finally my mom, my dad came home and asked where I was and I was staying with a friend and he immediately came around and got me. We had a heart-to-heart talk. But it also led to my involvement in the Civil Rights Movement when the, when the college students decided to march, I was, you know off the bus and hey, I was with them. Speaker 1: Now this is--now, now you're talking--now, now why, why don't we go back to this, this college girl first of all. Did she realize that you were an eighth grader? Speaker 2: I didn't ask the question. (laughter) Speaker 1: You weren't telling her and she didn't ask. Okay now, all right so, okay now-- Speaker 2: See I was the last--see I was, you know and she probably--at some point I guess she did. But they were--you know the bus would drop the kids off, the college kids off at the campus first and so I would be the last one dropped off. So you know-- Speaker 1: She didn't know where you were going. Speaker 2: She didn't know where I was going. You know, I could be a young college freshman, whatever. Speaker 1: That's good. Speaker 2: And so when I caught the bus, I had to walk down to the campus because that where the buses parked to get on them. And they parked, they parked in front of the Student Union. And so you know, the, the school got out at 3:30, the bus didn't leave until five. And so I occupied my time in the college Student Union and did things and so you know--to, to--other than my size probably, to anyone that was like, you know, going to college. Speaker 1: Now, now how long did you date this college girl? Speaker 2: Not that long. Not that long. Speaker 1: Now and you said your--so your mother kicked you out of the house. How, what was the dialogue around that? Speaker 2: Well you know, she, you know she said if I was old enough to, to set my own hours to come in then I was old enough to be on my own. Speaker 1: So what time were you coming in? Speaker 2: Eleven, midnight. Story_ID: 23632 Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now the--on the other--now the Civil Rights, this is the, the famous sit-ins that the President of Southern was Felton G. Clark, right at the time and one of the-- Speaker 2: Yeah, 1960. Speaker 1: --leader of the students, one of the leaders I know was D'Army Bailey and so tell us about this dramatic--cause this is a big dramatic story. We've heard several version of this story and it's really like, almost like a Shakespearean-- Speaker 2: Well you know it was a, it was a fascinating time. Most people don't realize--it was the time Cassius Clay came on campus, Muhammad Ali. He actually came down to the high school and interacted with us. It was a time that actually King [Martin Luther King Jr.] came through Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. And you know, I had, I had become like a mascot to the college kids on the bus. And so you know, when they decided to march downtown, hey, bring along the mascot. To, to be honest with you, I probably didn't know all that was going on. But to me, you know if they were going to do it, then hey I was going to do it too. And I think that was one of the reasons why when, you know there was a call for students in '63 [1963] to integrate schools in Baton Rouge, you know I was one of the more, one of the first along with some friends of mine, to sign up and say hey, you know, I'm willing to do that. I'm willing to, to cross that line and make the sacrifice. Speaker 1: Yeah this is, this is 1963 when you were in the eighth grade, '62 [1962] I guess for you cause you were, you were a year behind, right? Speaker 2: Sixty-- Speaker 1: Ahead rather. Speaker 2: Well in '62 [1962] I was in the ninth grade. I was, yeah, going into the ninth grade. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Cause in '63 [1963] when-- Speaker 1: You were 12 but you were like a year ahead. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so-- Speaker 1: So was 1962 the year that D'Army Bailey and the group-- Speaker 2: 1962, '61 [1961], '62 [1962], yeah. That, that, that, that time. They had started talking about it in '60 [1960], cause there were things that were done--cause I remember some of the issues and some of the things that were coming to the fore, the forefront. By '63 [1963] I was in carpool. My mom decided buses were not the best thing for me, and so-- Speaker 1: Now do you re--I'm sorry, I just want to get-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Now do you remember when, when Felton Clark kicked the students off of campus? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what was that--I mean did it affect you as a high, as a high school student? Speaker 2: No cause I was a mascot, you know. You know there's something about being young and, and people saying you know hey, you know you don't have to worry about, you know he's just a [unclear]. Speaker 1: How did you manage to attend the high school and then participate in these--did, did any other high school students participate in the sit-ins? Speaker 2: No but remember I was, I was with these college kids. So in the morning, you know, you know I could get off at the college, you know, whether the bus stopped at the high school, you know, depending on whether somebody was on there and if I wasn't on there, he would just go back the--another run because remember for--to get to Southern there weren't, there weren't city buses. If you lived out where I lived in Valley Park and, and Mayfair and that area, the only way that you got up to Southern or the high school, or even the junior high, was by way of these private buses that you would pay a fee to for them to pick you up. Speaker 1: So like Southern's actually in a suburb called Scotlandville, right. Speaker 2: Up in Scotlandville, yeah. And so the only way for me to, to get there, you know--I used to joke. I got up to go to school before the sun came up and I came home when the sun was down. You know so I never saw--for a period of time I never--other than on the weekend, I never saw my home in the, in the sunlight. Speaker 1: So you rode--that's a--so, so you escaped the punishment for--you did these things and escaped the, the consequences. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Moved on through--so, so in '63 [1963] you were saying that they-- Speaker 2: In '63 [1963] they put out a call. They had already started in the first and 12th grade. They decided to integrate first and 12th grade. And they had individuals who had done that. And then they called for the 11th grade. And when they made the call I was in the 10th grade. And that was in '63 [1963] when Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] was killed. And I said hey, I got to do this. And so my mom decided to support me in doing this. And it was an interesting period. They threatened her job. They couldn't threaten my dad's job cause he worked out of the city, but they threatened her job. You know, bullets were left on her car. And so I have to say that she stood by me and my dad stood by me, although he was--he didn't question to some extent whether it was really going to be worth the potential life of his son, his only son. But you know we went through it. We started out actually riding separate buses. The only bus, and now I think ironically, the only bus that I could take to get to Lee High was a bus that picked up elementary kids, so it's kind of a role reversal. And so it would pick up for the elementary kids in my neighborhood and pick me up. And then drop the elementary kids off at Valley Park Elementary and then drop me off at the high school. So I hadn't thought about that, it's been years. Story_ID: 23633 Speaker 1: You all were trying to integrate the high school by just showing up? Speaker 2: No we, we were registered. Speaker 1: You were registered, okay. Speaker 2: They brought us in and actually had us register separately from all of the, the other students. We came in earlier. Speaker 1: Okay so this is like what happened at Central High School in Little Rock [Arkansas] and Norview in Norfolk [Virginia] and other places. Speaker 2: Right, and so there were four of us that were there to integrate the 11th grade. And I think there were another two that integrated the 12th grade on that, on that campus, Robert E. Lee, interesting. And so on the first day of class, we all met, all the students, 1,500 plus, met in the auditorium and at the end of the roll call, cause they called them for homeroom, I was still sitting there. And so I was asked to come to the Principal's office. And I got assigned to a 10th grade. Reason why I was left there was that at Southern you took Civics and that sort of--that class in the 11th grade. In the public school system, you took that class in the 10th grade. And so I was assigned for my homeroom to be a tenth, to a tenth grade class as opposed to being in the 11th grade home. And so when I showed up in the room, the--my homeroom teacher Mr. Castro, I won't forget that name, who I later found out was the exalted grand poohah or whatever, of the Ku Klux Klan for the region. And, and so he was not too happy to have me placed in his classroom. And so you know I took a seat where there was a vacant seat. And so the next day when I showed up for class, all the, all the class, all the chairs had been moved to one side of the room, and there was a separate chair on the other side of the room. And I guess everybody had been told to come in early so that was the only seat that was left. So I sat there for homeroom and for my Civics class. So that, that evening I called my grand, my uncle and I said I need to get to class early. Can you come and pick me up? He was retired. And so he brought me early and so I sat on the other side and when the students came in, they looked, and so they all stood up the rest of the class period, for both homeroom and Civics. Speaker 1: Supported by their teacher. Speaker 2: Supported by their teacher. Speaker 1: Of course. Speaker 2: So the next day the doors were locked. And so when we came in the class he says I'm going to assign people their seat alphabetically, fine. I'm still trying to figure out how J ended up being the last chair in the last row over in the corner, but that's, that was my assigned, my assigned seat. And so for the first six weeks he had people, had this Jewish kid who actually is a lawyer here in Houston [Texas] now, Charles, paired with me. And we graded each other's exams and you know--so at the end of that six week period, he had, you know people come up and call the grades out of the students. And when they got to me, you know, I had the second highest grade in class. And so when it was called out, one said is that an error? What was the scores? And, and Charles started calling them out. And so the next six weeks and the rest of the--well for the next two six weeks, Mr. Castro decided he was going to grade you based on his perception of what you did. So that led to my mother and father coming to question my grades. And so he had to go back to the standard exams and had to answer questions from the students about my mental capabilities. So that was an interesting first year. Story_ID: 23634 Speaker 1: I got shot, or close to being shot. Speaker 2: What happened? Speaker 1: We were going--headed to the gym along a walkway and a loud sound happened. I wrenched back and what had happened was fortunately I had a huge bunch of books in front of me and stopped the bullet. People scattered, nothing was ever done but, you know-- Speaker 2: You don't know where it came from? Speaker 1: No, no one was called. Speaker 2: What kind of bullet was it, do you know? Speaker 1: It was a small caliber. Speaker 2: Twenty-two. Speaker 1: If it had been a larger one, I probably wouldn't be sitting here talking to you. Call, you know my family came up again and you know, nothing like that ever happened again other than one time cornered by the football players and I beat the hell out of them with, with a--fortunately there was a wooden globe next to me and I just started swinging it and caught them in their heads. Got sent to the principal's office, disciplined and they were saying, you know, violent attack by student. Speaker 2: Negro-- Speaker 1: It was, yeah anyway, but after those two incidents, you know the, the, rumor was that, you know I was some sort of--had a voodoo protection over me or something and people shouldn't mess with me. It made for, for my--a good senior year. I mean there were, there were a number of incidents in my junior year. There was a time with--they had carved out a, a hole in my, in my seat in my chemistry class and had poured acid in it so that when I would sit down the acid would be sucked up and you know fortunately one of my classmates warned me about it and so--it was interesting. Speaker 2: Now how did you--you know most high school students have, it's a time for you know, serious self-discovery and the teen angst and all that sort of thing. It's a rough time anyway for a lot of teenagers to be in high school. But to be in high school and have--to be fighting against, you know, this organized, racist attack with flimsy help from the administration. Did--what, what did the Principal say about all this? Speaker 1: Very little, you know. I ended up almost actually flunking out of school. I don't know whether that had to do with stress or, or--but my first six weeks I developed pneumonia and then double pneumonia. And so I was in and out of school for the first six weeks of my senior year. I managed to, you know, get over and graduate. But it was a rough I guess first six weeks starting out. Speaker 2: Yeah I just wonder how people deal with it. I've interviewed other people from the Little Rock Nine and from, you know, Nor--Norview 17 and--Norfolk 17 and they, they, they tell you stories very similar to what you're telling. And yet they went back to school every day. Speaker 1: Yeah I mean you know I, you know some people asked me and I said--I mean it was, you know what else are you going to do? Grow up and die? You know you go back and, you know it, it's--you have to be cognizant of what's going on around you. Story_ID: 23635 Speaker 1: Who did your--did you have support from the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or, or ministers or, or--who, who counseled you? There had to be somebody giving you some counseling or instruction or-- Speaker 2: No, the only counseling we got were, was at the beginning. There was a group of Quakers, permanent--all white actually, who basically came in and you know, said to us, you know, you know this is going to happen to you. This is what you need to do, you know. You need to be cognizant of your surroundings. You need to be careful in terms of people who you, who you choose as friends because they may not be. And so it was, you know it was like training for gorilla warfare as I now think about it. But that was the only, that was the only thing that we got going into this. Speaker 1: So no official role NAACP used or anything like that? Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge. Speaker 1: I know they, they, they played in a role in Norfolk [Virginia] I know and, and in Little Rock [Arkansas]. Speaker 2: Right, but nothing, you know no I can't think of any, any role. I think we relied on ourselves. I mean the group of us that went there. Speaker 1: Did the other students make it to graduation? Speaker 2: Yeah all four of us graduated. You know we were all from the same neighborhood, which was interesting. I mean that may have been what helped us. I mean we were all within three to four blocks of each other in the neighborhood, Mayfair Park, the subdivision that we stayed in. Speaker 1: What was the gender makeup of the four? Speaker 2: Three boys and one girl. Speaker 1: Did you ever have classes together? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: That, that seems to be exactly what happened to the others. Always separated. So did you, would you see the rest of them during the school day at all? Speaker 2: At lunch. I mean you know I think in the junior year two of us had overlapping lunch periods. But that was about it. Speaker 1: Was it ever a time when you, you wanted to--just if you--cause you could of, couldn't you have decided to go--I'll go to another school, go to a black high school and graduate? Speaker 2: Yeah but I guess I never thought about it as an option. I had, you know, for lack of a better term, made my bed and so I was going to have to, to, to live in it. And you know academically other than, you know my, my--what occurred at the initial beginning, I was doing well so I mean my grades were not suffering. I mean they suffered to some extent, but not to the point where you know I didn't feel I was going to finish school. Speaker 1: Now was there any, any friend in school at all, any teacher or student that befriended you or tried to make things easier? Speaker 2: No, none openly. I think because if they did, they would have been retaliated against. No I would say no. There were, there were individuals who helped in various points in time like the, like Charles did in terms of, you know the whole issue of the acid in the seat of warning me. And maybe because he had been my partner earlier in terms of the, the Civics class and that sort of thing. But you know there, there weren't kids that we buddy/buddied with and that sort of thing. Speaker 1: Were there many Jewish kids in the school? Speaker 2: There were a number of them, there were a good--there were a number of foreign kids. I remember a kid, I can't think of his name, but who was from Iran that was in our class. Cause remember this was, well you don't know this, this school was close to LSU [Louisiana State University] and so a lot of the students, faculty that whose kids probably didn't go to the lab school there, probably ended up coming to, to Lee High. Speaker 1: Okay the school, that's Lee High, L-E-I-G-H? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: L-E-H-I-G-H. Speaker 2: No, it's Robert E. Lee. Speaker 1: Lee High. Right, okay sorry. Speaker 2: Robert E. Lee. Speaker 1: That's right, you said Robert E. Lee High, that's right. Speaker 2: In fact someone--because they didn't want us to graduate in the, the, in the auditorium, they burned the auditorium down. Speaker 1: That's significant. Speaker 2: So we had, we had to graduate on the, on the football field. It didn't make any difference cause if I had stayed at Southern I would have graduated on the football field anyway so it was like okay, fine. I'll graduate on the football field. Speaker 1: I'm not gone ask about the prom I guess. Speaker 2: We went, I went to the prom. Yeah I went. I didn't go to the junior/senior prom. I went to the junior/senior prom at, at Southern High School my junior year. But my senior prom, yeah I went to it. I had to find a date who was brave enough to go with me. And someone who was brave enough to go--to accompany me on a double date cause my mom did not want me to go by myself. And so my neighbor across the street, Charles Keys, who went to the Catholic high school, actually integrated the Catholic high schools there, he volunteered to go with me and his sisters, his, his girlfriend's sister went with me as my date to the prom which is, which was at one of the major hotels downtown. And so when we drove up to go to the prom, the attendant says where are you going? I said the prom. He said no, your prom is--no it's right here. He said Lee High? Yep, Lee High. I says look at the front bumper sticker. Cause I had Lee High School bumper sticker on my car. He said oh, okay. And so when we walked in, the chaperones came over and they said would you mind if you sit close to us? Said no problem. So we enjoyed the evening. We left early. We didn't go to the after parties. Story_ID: 23636 Speaker 1: Were you a member of clubs in high school or that sort of thing? Speaker 2: No, the clubs were in the evening. Speaker 1: Okay so you didn't stick around for-- Speaker 2: No. That's why I'm still sitting here. I remember we were invited to a club event and you know, myself and Michael Yates. Michael Yates was one of the other young, was the other student with me. And we said maybe, we'll think about it. And so we decided to check it out first and so we kind of snuck around and, and noticed that the environment was not conducive to us going, so we didn't show up. And the next day one of the guys says we were waiting for you. We said yeah we knew. You know, we know. Speaker 1: Okay so now when you were on the verge of graduation, did you have counseling in school about college? Did they say anything to you about that? Speaker 2: No. You know going back to my junior year, and so you--because of the classes--see I was, in some things I was behind, like civics. In some things I was advanced. And so some of the classes I took in my junior year were senior classes. And because seniors for the last six weeks sometimes don't go, I mean they like--you know this sort of thing. So my junior year was like heaven for me because the last three or four weeks of school the seniors were gone. And so I would end up going to class basically by myself. And so the instructor would say I don't know what I'm going to do with you. I said hey, let me go home. So he wrote me a note and my uncle would come pick me up and hey, I would go off and do things. But in my ju--in my senior, no. And what happened too is that if you made a certain grade at all the high schools, which I didn't know, my parents didn't know, probably nobody knew, you were automatically enrolled in LSU [Louisiana State University]. For some reason my transcript, my enrollment didn't make it there. So you know like with the rest of my, my graduation class, I show up for registration that summer and I show up at the registration office and the registrar looks and says Mrs. Jones, we have no record of your son registering. And she says well you should. And he says well, well we have no relationship with the black schools, with the Negro schools here in the area. She says no, my son graduated from Robert E. Lee [High School], so you should have his file there. Well come back this afternoon and we're figure out this. So I show up and they say oh, yeah. And so it was, it was those little things. Story_ID: 23637 Speaker 1: But I told my mom I wanted to stay on campus and my roommate happened to be Norman Gotchalf from, from New Orleans [Louisiana] who went to St. Augustine [University]. And at that time St. Augustine was a powerhouse in terms of football and he had been one of the leading running backs. And so we at--be roommates together, which was a good thing because he should have been in the athletic dorm but they didn't put him in the athletic dorm, they put him in the other dorm. And-- Speaker 2: So were you the first black student at LSU [Louisiana State University]? Speaker 1: No, they had, they had had other students, primarily graduate, but it was only during the late mid '60's, '69 [1969's], late--towards the--'64 [1964], '65 [1965] was when the first black undergraduate started showing up there. So I was among the first, but not the first that were there. I probably was among the first in the dorms, though. I mean that was an interesting experience. But I realized that I probably wouldn't finish at LSU. And I had to begin to think of alternatives because unlike high school where, you know, there were checks and balances to an extent that you could go through, college classes there weren't those checks and balances. People could give you Fs and you never knew why you ended up with an F. I remember the math class I was in and I realized that it was going to be that way. And so I, you know before drop time I decided to drop. And I ended up with an F anyway and I'm going wait a minute, I went, they said your paperwork didn't reach the, and I'm going, what's the date? You know and, and I would look at it and it was white-out, you know. I'm going--well, you know, so I said well this is gone be interesting, sort of thing. So you know I was doomed from the beginning. And because I wanted to major in--I thought I wanted to major in architecture because I had taken all the drafting courses in high school and Lee High had an exceptional, one of the programs they had there was a, was a drafting/architectural program which was exceptional. I thought I was going to do that, but forces to bear realized that was not going to be my direction and so I figured my strongest suit and the most support I had was in sciences. And I figured I could get my way through that. But civil unrest and a lot of things took place, you know '67 [1967], the Detroit [Michigan] riots, massive unrest across the country that started to influence things within the south. By '68 [1968], in fact June of '68 [1968] when--in April of '68 [1968] when, when King [Martin Luther King Jr.] was killed and massive uproar started taking across campus. Six, June when, when Bobby Kennedy got killed I said I got to get the hell out of here. Speaker 2: Now, now you--just to back up, you graduated from Robert E. Lee in 1966. Speaker 1: Right, yes. Speaker 2: Okay, so it's '67 [1967], 60, '68 [1968] you're a sophomore at LSU. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 23638 Speaker 1: At the end of my freshman year I got kicked out. I was put on academic probation. That F caught up with me. Speaker 2: So you weren't there for your sophomore year? Speaker 1: I started back in January, only about for a semester. But I started at the beginning saying you know, I went to work--actually I went to work at Shoney's Big Boy as a, as a cook. And then decided cooking was not going to be my forte for a while. And then went to work for Goldman Sachs, the department store, they had a department store in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], in terms of maintenance. Then realized that wasn't going to be my forte. And went back to LSU [Louisiana State University] but then realized I had to look for another venture and that's how I ended up in California with my, my dad's brother. Cause I was looking for any place that, as a young teenager, and my mom still thought I was young, that they would be willing to allow me to, to go to. Speaker 2: Okay. So, so where did you go in California to college? Speaker 1: First was scheduled to Sacramento College in Sacramento. I had a, a--first, well my mom had a first cousin that lived there, was an Air Force, worked on the SAC [Strategic Air Command] Air Force base. But at the time I got there, he was transferred to Turkey and he wanted to know if I wanted to go to Turkey. And my immediate response was nope. It's nice, but not for me at this time. And so I eventually ended up at Cal [California] State Hayward in, in Hayward, California, which is in the Bay area. And that's where I graduated from. Speaker 2: Okay. What was the atmosphere at Cal State Hayward? Speaker 1: Fun, fine. It was, you know it was a new campus that they had just built several years ago. So it was a lot of new, young faculty. I lived in Berkeley and commuted out there so, you know, had the best of both worlds. First, you know I commuted by transportation and bought my first car, lied about my age, falsified a few documents and, and bought me an MGB. Speaker 2: Okay so you, you were really getting slick. Speaker 1: You know it was, you know you learn a lot as I told you, working with college kids riding the bus, the little youngster. You, you're older than your years. Story_ID: 23639 Speaker 1: Now by this time are there any, any teachers that come along or pe--people that are like are mentors to you or that you look up to? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, are there any people that you don't know that you kind of admire? Speaker 2: Well you know there, there are a lot of things that, you know, my grand, my grandmother was--although she was not educated in the, in the pure sense of the word, was educated in, in teaching about black individuals. You know I had learned as a youngster about Ernest Justin and Langston Hughes and you know a lot of major figures in the African American community. My mom had met and had for a period of time developed a friendship with Jesse Owens and so I had stuff and information, and it was like Grand Central Station for a while in terms of individuals coming in through Baton Rouge [Louisiana] because they couldn't stay in hotels and places, they stayed with black individuals. And so you know I, I had a sense of who I was and, and what I wanted to do and I tell people that a lot of my success in, in moving forward is because as a child I was never really told no. I was never limited in terms of my horizons. And so my limitations were basically me and not anyone else. Although I lived in a segregated environment, there were people who wanted to do things, you know it was up to me to find a way around that. And so you know I tell people you can look at individuals in two classifications. Those who were told, who were not told no before the age of ten to 12, and those who were. And then those who were fall into multiple categories. Those who used their situations as an excuse for not doing what they, they're doing. Those who use other methods, criminal, to get to where they are. Those who put down who they are and others like them to get to where they are, and those who just accept and not move forward any kind of way. And then there's a group who because of it still exceed and excel, but who you can always tell because they're like a whipped puppy who may have been put into a, a nice home, but you lift up an arm and you see them flinch for a moment. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so you know when I raised my kids, I raised them with the idea that, you know, anything's possible. You just, just have to work towards it to make it happen. Story_ID: 23640 Speaker 1: When did you, I guess entertain the idea of being, be, becoming a doctor or a, or a, you know, a PhD in science? Speaker 2: I guess because I was told as a teenager, no. In junior high school when I was at Southern [University], my first year there, I won a science fair which was open to the entire state. And when I went to collect my award, I couldn't collect it because the individuals who had put it up, had put it up for a white student. And I didn't meet that criteria. And therefore--and, and that also had shaped my future in terms of what I wanted to do because what I had done was designed a moon base for astronauts in terms of what was needed for them to survive on the moon. And so I won an aer--aeronautical engineering award to visit an aeronautical engineering facility and spend time there. Never happened, which was truly disappointing to me. And so I tended to gravitate to other experiments, other contests that were more scientific, biological in nature. When I went to college, I tried to revive, at LSU [Louisiana State University] revive that interest, got pushed back and so I, I said well you know, the world is telling me something. Go this way and you know I will succeed. I go this way and it's going to be a rough road. Not that it's going to be easy going this way, but it's something that I can do, something that I enjoy, and something that would be fulfilling. And so when I ended up at Cal [California] State, I decided to major in biological sciences with the idea that I would ultimately go on and probably go to medical school and be an obstetrician or pediatrician or something along those lines. But life's events changed that. Story_ID: 23641 Speaker 1: I met--I got married. Speaker 2: How old were you when you got married? Speaker 1: Let's see, I was 21. Speaker 2: So it was 1971. Speaker 1: 1970. Speaker 2: '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Now how, was, was your, was your wife a fellow student, or-- Speaker 1: I met my wife in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]. In fact my wife's--my wife was the sister of the young lady who my mom identified to walk me to school when I was walking from McKinley Junior High to McKinley Elementary. To show you how small the world is. And I met my wife when I was back in between semesters. Cause I came back from Sacramento [California] to go to Hayward [California] and so I was at home for a short period of time, and I actually was going to date the girlfriend that I had taken with me to the prom. And she decided she had something else to do. So I went to another party that a friend of mine was giving down the street, so happened to meet my wife, future wife, and beginning to date her while I was there. And then continued the relationship when I went back to California. And so our families had known each other, but I hadn't known her until that point. I knew her sister, I knew her brothers, but I'd never met her. Speaker 2: Okay, so did she move out to California with you I guess? Speaker 1: Yeah. We, we dated long distance. Decided hey, it was time to get married, and I brought her out to California. And she actually worked for a while and then decided she wanted to go back to school, so we were in, we were in school about the same time, both at Cal [California] State Hayward. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: So in a way we were classmates. Speaker 2: Okay, all right. Speaker 1: Roommates, classmates. Speaker 2: Alright. Speaker 1: And had my, my first child in '71 [1971]. Speaker 2: Okay so this is--how, how many do you have now? Speaker 1: Two. Speaker 2: Two, okay, alright. Story_ID: 23642 Speaker 1: But I, I'm trying to think of Christopher's last name. But there was a faculty member--we--friend of mine, Cecil Pickett. And if you guys haven't recorded Cecil, you might want to put him as one of the HistoryMakers. I had never went through the list to see whether he was in it. But Cecil and I took biochemistry with Chris. And Chris happened to be good friends of the Chair of the Department of Biology at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles]. And he told his friend he had two exceptional African American students. You know their grades were not the best, but they were very bright and that he should give them an opportunity to, to apply to graduate school and see how they did. Accept them probationally and then see how they, they did. I pushed my wife about moving to L.A. [Los Angeles]. At the time she was pregnant with our first child. She was not that enthused. But what I did was I worked out with UCLA to delay my admissions until my son was born, and then look at moving. Cecil went down and started the program. As she was walking across Berkeley's campus, cause she was taking an extension course there towards her degree, she came across an advertisement that Berkeley was interested in minority graduate students. And she brought the flyer home and she said here, we don't have to move. Why don't you go and talk to the people at Berkeley? And interestingly enough, the program that was being sponsored at UC [University of California] Berkeley, was through the Department of Education, U.S. [United States] Department of Education. And the person who was over that program happened to be Leonard Spearman from Baton Rouge [Louisiana], who was a family friend. And I approached the Chair at that time, at Berkeley, the Chair of Zoology, and the head of the Admissions Committee, and told him that I had already been accepted at UCLA. And he said hey, manner of switching your paperwork here to Berkeley. You don't have to apply. Since you're admitted there, you're, you're admitted here. And he says well it's late, we don't have funds for, for--to support you. But we do know there's a new program here. And I said this one? And he says yes. And he said the person who's over the program will be campus tomorrow, can you come back and meet with him? Sure. The rest is history. Speaker 2: And it's Leonard Spearmen. Speaker 1: I said I need money to go to graduate school. He says I have the program. Story_ID: 23643 Speaker 1: Okay so, so you're, you're a graduate student pursuing a master's I guess in-- Speaker 2: I started out pursuing a master's and then through the program they said hey this guy can, can handle it. And actually in my third year Berkeley decided to create an MB [Bachelor of Medicine] PhD [Doctor of Philosophy] program. And so I had an opportunity to, to enroll in that along with another friend, Norman Edwards who actually completed the program. But then I, you know as I was thinking about it, and often tell this story to individuals that as I began to look at it, it was--what did I really want to do? What is my life's ambition? And it was discovery. That had always been the tie to everything I did. And I began to, I began to realize that there were a number of people who opened doors for me that if they hadn't, you know, I wouldn't be where I, where I was at that point in time. And that I needed to really look at this in terms of going forward. And so I began to help Berkeley develop its program to recruit minorities in the sciences. I started traveling around the country, promoting it, talking to the leadership there about what was needed. I managed to recruit a number of individuals who have gone on to do a number of things. Jerry Guyden who is Chicago [Illinois], I mean New York, who heads for the last 20 years, is one of the top T Cell receptor people in the country. Kenneth Butane who's Mount Xavier's Dean of the School of Arts and Sciences at Xavier. Sheila McClure who now heads the Research Centers of Minorities Institutions at the National Institutes of Health. I mean the list is-- Speaker 1: Now this was while you were working on your PhD? Speaker 2: Yeah. Basically going out and PhD and into my post-doc, basically going out and, and pulling people in. You know I joke and say that when I was admitted into the graduate school, I was probably the 42nd of the 42 students that were taken in the program. But when I graduated, I had more publications than most graduate students have when they come out of the graduate program. I was considered one of their brightest students coming through the program. Ended up being the first African American to get his PhD out of that program. Speaker 1: Who, who was your advisor? Speaker 2: My advisor was Howard Burn, who unfortunately just passed this year. But the one thing I would say about Howard is that--what I learned about him is that he had had an, an African American student prior to me being in his research group. And that student didn't do well. And so he didn't label any other student coming through there black, white or whatever by that student. And I will never forget when I found this out I said Howard, you know, you know this is, this is, this is unusual. He said, he said what do you mean? I said generally when someone like you takes on a black student and they don't do well you, you generally you know--he said hey, I gave him a chance, blah, blah, blah. He said well you're Lovell. You're not this person, you're not that person, you're you. So I'm judging you by you, not by anybody else. So if you perform, you perform. If you don't, hey, I move on to the next person. Speaker 1: Which was a lot different from high school. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so you know, for all of his life he played a role as a mentor. I mean he would call up one time and he'll say you know, now that you're a full professor, you're not calling me anymore? You got too big for you britches? You don't need me? But there was a saying that I used too from him. He says that your greatest contribution to life is not the papers you publish, it's not the grants you obtain, it's the people you leave behind to carry on the work. Story_ID: 23644 Speaker 1: My dissertation as--was unique. I would say graduate dissertations are something different, unique, but safe cause you don't want to spend ten years in graduate school, some people do. And you want to keep it to where you, you know you're going to get something out of it, something publishable as they say. But at the time I started graduate school, there was this--and let me also say I wanted to do something in graduate school that was human related. I didn't want to do something esoteric. And I really started off graduate school wanting to do something in cardiovascular disease cause my grandmother had died from a heart attack. And so that was something that had influenced me. And so the interest of the Chair of the department at Berkeley in zoology, research was cardiology. And given he had interviewed me, he became the person's lab that I, I was in. But they had to assign a senior graduate student to be like my mentor so to speak. And that senior graduate student was Frank Talamantes. And Frank happened to work in Howard Burns' lab. Speaker 2: What's his last name, how do you spell that? Speaker 1: T-A-L-A-M-A-N-T-E-S. And Frank was one of the first Mexican Americans in that department. And so they thought having two minorities, it will work out well. Frank happened to be in Howard Burns' lab and was Howard's senior student. I didn't know what the darn endocrinology was. It was like okay, fine. But Frank said follow me around and we'll see and we'll help you. And so the first class I took was endocrinology. It's like whoa. And I studied like gangbusters. It was like whoa. But I did well. I mean it was, you know and I began to like it. And as the, the year that I was supposed to rotate and see where I wanted to be, I began to gravitate to Howard's group as opposed to Richard Stroman's [ph.] group who was the Chair of the Department. And so Howard would always say when I was around that he wasn't taking anymore graduate students, he already had his number and he was looking to retire and that sort of thing. And towards the end he says well, I'll take you as my last one. I was never, I was not his last one. He said I'm going to take you as my last student. And as I was beginning to look at what I was going to do, there was this issue that came up about women who were exposed to hormones during pregnancy. And that there was this cancer, clear cell abnormal of the vaginal tract that was appearing in young girls as young as seven. And that, that began to fascinate me. And I began to look at what Howard and some of his former students had done and thought that what they had been able to do would establish a model, an animal model to see what were the mechanisms that may have led to this situation. Was it a hormone, was it just being exposed to an estrogen, or was it being exposed to a chemical or, or just what was going on? Was this chemical carcinogenesis or environmental or hormonal or a combination of those. And so I worked to begin to set this up and Howard, you know, saying this is, this is a shot in the dark cause no one has done this. You know you may end up with nothing. You may spend your time but if you really want to do this, then I'm willing to allow you to do that. And he said but I'm going to let you do it for a master's. And if it doesn't work out, you know, we can write your master's thesis on it and then we'll change for your PhD. Well as it turns out I was able to create a model that led to my PhD dissertation on the influence of estrogens in term--natural estrogens in terms of carcinogenesis and the whole idea of timing. That early exposure during a critical period to a natural occurring hormone can lead to cancer. Speaker 2: Alright and you state your--what was the title of your dissert--or you can you, or can you simplify it for maybe. Speaker 1: Sure, it's "Early Exposure Of Hormones And Their Effect On Early Development". Speaker 2: Okay. Of, of young girls basically, right? Speaker 1: Right. It's the--it was establishing this model that--cause you couldn't go and take, you know, pregnant women and inject them with hormones deliberately and see what was going to happen several years later. That's what happened to an extent with diethylstilbestrol, it was given to these women to prevent spontaneous abortion. But in the end it may have stopped the abortion, but it affected the development of their genital tract in terms of ultimately developing cancer. But no one knew what the mechanisms were, mechanisms were and whether or not this was something that could be recurrent by other exposures. And so what I did for my graduate work was to develop this model which is still being used by a number of labs around the country in terms of a mouse model look at different effects early exposure. Story_ID: 23645 Speaker 1: So, I suppose you published this too, right as a--that's why everybody's using it. Speaker 2: Yeah. In fact I was walking out one evening a week ago and a colleague of mine who actually also had gone to Berkeley but we met here who knew of my work said you know I just gave your paper, one of your early papers to another colleague because they were interested in models with regards to exposure and early exposure mechanism. And I thought this was something they could use to develop that research off of, I said great. Thirty years old, but-- Speaker 1: Yeah. So and, so this is 1980 right, when you--no, you finished in '77 [1977]. Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977], so this, so the first, the first published work on this was in 1973/'74 [1974]. And actually it was presented at the International Hormonal Carcinogenesis meeting in Mexico City in 1975. And became part of a NIH [National Institute of Health] monograph in '76 [1976] on hormonal exposure. And actually led to--what's one of the things among a group of other scientists, it led to the field of hormonal carcinogenesis, which is still a burgeoning field today for, for a young scientist. Story_ID: 23646 Speaker 1: Okay so what happened right after you earned your PhD? Speaker 2: I applied for a post-doctoral fellowship. I had applied for several places. Actually I applied to Vanderbilt [University], that was an interesting experience, Vanderbilt. Showing up there they didn't suspect I was black coming from Berkeley. In--interesting discussions I had with some of the faculty there. A few of them recommended I look at Mehary [Medical College] and then I'd feel comfortable over there. Anyway needless to say I didn't end up at Vanderbilt. I interviewed at the FDA [Food and Drug Administration] facility in, in--outside of Little Rock [Arkansas], National Toxicology Research Center there. Little Rock was not the place in my, my repertoire that I wanted to go. Interesting facility, lot of chances to do things. Interviewed at the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences in Research Triangle Park. Loved the place. Wife did not like it. Too far from shopping malls. At that time there was nothing there and she said well, you know I tell you what. It's something that my--I guess my mom had said to my dad, or my dad said, whichever way. She said you can go there for your two years of post-doc, just send the checks back to San Francisco/Berkeley. No, I didn't think that would work. And then one of my post-doctoral, or my pre-doctoral dissertation committee members said, you know, why don't you write for an independent NIH post-doc and come work with me? And those things are like hen's teeth to get. You know I mean but the three of us, three individuals who finished out of the cancer research lab, which was the only freestanding cancer research lab in the country at the time that wasn't affiliated with a hospital, medical school, that sort of thing. The three of us, Sandy Haslam [ph.], I can't think of Yvonne's last name, and myself, Yvette actually, who is now--went to British Columbia [Canada], Sandy who's at Michigan State [University], all got independent NIH post-doctoral fellowships to further our careers. And so I went to work with Vincent Ore at University of California San Francisco and did my post-doc there in the Reproductive Endocrinology Center. Worked a little bit on extending my work in hormones and cancer, but ending up developing a tech--technique and technology that's used today in terms of measuring free hormones with the idea of it's the free level in percentage of hormones that might be related to carcinogenesis than the bound version published in the Journal of Bio, Biological Chemistry, one of the top journals in, in the country. And that began to set my career in another direction in terms of actually working directly with human cancers, breast, ovarian, endometrial, those cancers. And then ended up on the faculty there, Francis Gagong, world renowned medical physiologist who happened to be another mentor, had a position open in his department. Speaker 1: Can you spell his last name? Speaker 2: It's G-A-G-O-N-G. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And so you know he hired me. Ended up being a faculty member in his department with a joint position in, in obstetrics and gynecology and reproductive sciences. Interesting enough, in an area that I had earlier talked about being a physician in, then ending up in that--as a researcher in terms of what I wanted to do. Story_ID: 23647 Speaker 1: And then that May of '79 [1979], my mom--I was informed that my mom had--May of '79 [1979] or May of '78 [1978]? My mom had developed breast cancer. And here I was in a research group whose mission was looking--one of the missions was looking at breast cancer eradication of breast cancer and that sort of thing. My mom had come out for Christmas earlier that year and I didn't think anything of it. My wife told me she thought something was wrong. I was probably so full of myself at the time because here I was at one of the leading research places in the country, had a office that overlooked the Golden Gate Bridge, over the Marine County, lived in an area, in the East Bay that overlooked the San Rafael Bridge. I mean it was--life was golden. And so--and here was my mom coming to visit her only son who was now this faculty member and at this prestigious place and so forth and so on. Hey, and so I kind of brushed over that until I got the call from my dad who said your mom's in the hospital. She just had surgery and I'm going what? Did she go out and fall off a ladder? You know, what happened? And he said no, your mom had breast cancer. That's impossible. You know she was just here, I had talked to her, she didn't say anything about it. You know and when I turned to my wife and said--she said yeah, I told you I thought something was wrong. You know, you know you have to think about southern moms don't come to travel to you, you travel to visit them. And my mom was a southern mom. And so that should have, should have triggered something, but it didn't. And then with that I said--I went into my mentor's office who also happened to be my boss too, and I said I got, I got to go home. And he says what, what happened and I told him what happened. And I said I have to get, I have to find a way of getting somewhere close to her, but I have to go and make a difference, I said. I don't feel I'm making a difference here. And he said well you are and I said no I'm not. I said what I'm doing right now is not having impact and I need to have impact. He said but you are, you're [unclear]. I said no I'm not. And I came home and then I came back and I said I'm moving. He said where are you going? I said I don't know, but I'm moving. I said I'm going to look at M.D. Anderson [Cancer Center in Texas]. I said I can't move to Sloan Kettering [New York], that's too far away. I'm going to look at some place that's close. And he said well how much are they offering you? I said they aren't offering me anything. I said even if I have to, even if I have to go there and be a janitor, I got to go to someplace I think I can make a difference. He said you, you're giving up your career. I said I got to do something. A couple of days later he calls me in the office. He says how would you like to go to M.D. Anderson? I said I told you. He said no, would you really want to go to M.D. Anderson? I said yeah., He says I've been offered a Chairmanship at M.D. Anderson and I've been offered several faculty positions and I'd like to offer you one. Great, hey, what do I need to do? He said I need for you to go and be my eyes and ears. To look the place over, to tell me what we need to move down there. And so I came down, spent six weeks with my mom coming, going back and forth and look at this. And then at the end, towards the end of the six weeks, he came over. And he says--he started looking at the place. And then towards the end of his visit, he leaves and so I call over to find out what the next steps are and I was told he's gone. And so I called him at home later and said well I'm heading back to Baton Rouge [Louisiana], what's the next steps? He says I'm not moving. I said what do you mean you're not moving? He said I'm not moving. He said you can do what you do, but I'm not moving. So I drive to my in-laws and as soon as I get there, my mother-in-law runs out and says you got a phone call from M.D. Anderson. I said okay. So I go in and it's Dr. Hickey, Robert Hickey who was the second in command of Anderson at the time and he says Dr. Jones, as you know Dr. Sittery [ph.] is not coming, but we would like to offer you a faculty position anyway. I said well I got to think about it. I have to talk to Phen [ph.] first and see what the situation is. So get together with him and get back to us. And so I called Phen up and I talked to him. He says this is--you wanted to go, this is your opportunity to go, take it. I said well I still have a year that I wanted to do things. He says tell them you can't come for a year. If they really want you, they'll be willing to wait. The rest is history. Story_ID: 23648 Speaker 1: Okay so you were able to be in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] with, with your mother. Speaker 2: I called, told them I needed a year. I come back actually to San Francisco [California] to work on closing up what I was doing to make that transition with my family. And show up in Houston [Texas] in 1980. I spent that year commuting back and forth, doing things, working to get my family situated and to move. I just had my second child and so it was trying to balance that out and move now two children and a wife who had a career, in terms of getting her situated. Speaker 1: Okay, alright so well, so you've been here ever since, really in some way or another. Speaker 2: I've been here ever since. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Thirty two years. Speaker 1: Alright, so -- Speaker 2: Yeah I ended up being the first African American, which I didn't realize but found out soon, first African American Basic Behavioral Scientist hired at M.D. Anderson [Cancer Center in Texas]. The first to be promoted to associate professor, first to be promoted to full professor. The first to hold an administrative position. Lot of firsts. Speaker 1: Okay, now how did your mother fair? I was concerned about that. Speaker 2: I was able to get her into care. The best possible care she could have gotten. And even though she had a large tumor, it was not the best situation that she had delayed the way she had. But I knew the endocrinologist, I knew the oncologist in the area, and got her into some of the best care she could have gotten. Unfortunately, you know 13 years later, 12 years later, my father who didn't I guess take as good of care of himself as he should have, developed prostate cancer and it was an advanced disease. And my mom spent a lot of time taking care of him and didn't take care of herself. And when he died, shortly afterwards, she developed a second primary which she died soon after. Speaker 1: Okay so this would be-- Speaker 2: It was '93 [1993] and then '95 [1995] for her. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 23649 Speaker 1: So 1980 at M.D. Anderson [Cancer Center in Texas]. Now you joined as a member of the graduate faculty, right, and -- Speaker 2: In '82 [1982]. Speaker 1: That happened in '82 [1982], okay. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Alright, so that's a progression from-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, alright okay so tell us about what your research has been about and, and what are the milestones here? Speaker 2: When I started out, I mean the reason I was recruited was to develop a research program directed towards hormones and hormone therapy, primarily the treatment of gynecological malignancies. That was the department I was recruited to, gynecological oncology. Continued my work with regards to breast cancer and bio available estrogens. Continued some of my work in terms of hormonal carcinogenesis. Got grants in that area. And then began to develop why I had really moved here, cause I could have done all that work in San Francisco [California]. That wasn't the issue. What I really came here to change the face of cancer. To really bring the issues of that in minority and underserved communities because I realized with my mom who was well educated, had access to services through me and through herself, for her to delay seeking treatment meant that a lot of the myths and things that were associated with cancer were still alive and, and, and impacting peoples' lives. I mean she thought because of the diagnosis she had gotten that it was a death sentence. Now that was one of the reasons why she came to visit me and visit her grandkids and the family, to say goodbye. And then when it became an issue, sought care for it. You know here's a woman who had access, a chance to, to intervene early. And I said something's got to be done. And it has to be done in a place that people will listen. I didn't think people would listen from where I was. But I felt there were three places that they would listen from. Memorial Sloan Kettering [Cancer Center in New York] being one, Roselle Park being another because they were--Roselle Park being the first cancer center started, or NCI, National Cancer Institute. I didn't want to work for the federal government, Buffalo was too cold and too far. Didn't like New York, still too cold, too far and Houston [Texas] was close enough. And that's how I ended up focusing on Houston. Story_ID: 23650 Speaker 1: In 1984 Frank Talamantes who had been my graduate student mentor, had started serving on an NIH [National Institutes of Health] study section that had to do with enhancing minority training in the sciences, and extended an invitation, he'd become Chair of that committee. And he extended an invitation for me to join him, which I did. Through that I learned that NCI [National Cancer Institute] was starting a program on addressing cancer in black Americans that LaSalle Leffall who I had met earlier in my career. Speaker 2: From Howard [University]. Speaker 1: From Howard, had had a meeting as the first black President of the American Cancer Society back in '79 [1979], to highlight blacks in cancer. There was a report that was being generated that showed the situation was getting worse. And I was wondering when they were going to release this report, and how they were going to release it and how much money they were going to put forth. And so I began to formulate the idea of if I was in charge, how would I address this situation, what would I do first, and what would I do next and then what? What would occur after that? And that's when I came up with the idea of having a meeting that would involve everyone. Not just scientists, not just advocates, not just politicians, but everyone, Americans to meet and discuss how one would go about addressing this issue. And in '85 [1985], NCI, the National Cancer Institute, pushed to identify the month of May as Black Cancer Awareness Month. And I was looking for some sign that people were being made aware of it. Being here at M.D. Anderson [Cancer Center in Texas] I said wow you know, you know we have banners for this month and banners for that month and so forth. I was waiting to see a banner highlighting the need to address black Americans and cancer. I didn't see anything. And so I started calling around and saying what's going on? And I finally reached Barbara Bynum who was the person pushing for this, whose husband was the Exec Sec for the study section I was on. And said, you know, what's going on and telling her my ideas and how much money I would like to have to do it. And she said great idea Dr. Jones, go for it, but I don't have any money for you. Okay, that's a challenge. And so because I've grown up in the cancer arena, I knew a lot of people. Howard Burn made it a point to introduce me to people coming through the lab. The, the stars that were in the cancer arena/health arena I had met, interacted with, talked to. And so I began to call around and say you know, this is what I want to do. And then I met with a group of African American, John Ruffin being one of them who is now the Director of the National Institute for Minority Health and Health Disparities, David Sacher [ph.] being another person. We met in a hotel room. And I said this is what I want to do, guys. And they said go for it. And that led to the first annual symposium on minorities and cancer, which was held in Houston in 1987. We just celebrated the 25th anniversary of it in July. Story_ID: 23651 Speaker 1: So 1988 this symposium series of minorities, the medically underserved and cancer is founded here at M.D. Anderson [Cancer Center in Texas]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So-- Speaker 2: It was the first time that the National Cancer Institute, the American Cancer Society and the Office of Minority Health, the newly created Office of Minority Health with Herb Dickens, came together to support a meeting on cancer. They had never been together in doing that. When I talked about having the second people said well you only had the first. Man you were so successful, why have another? I said I haven't changed the face of cancer yet. It's gone take more than one meeting. But when I was putting it together, it was the idea that it had to be done in sequential fashion like concentric circles, overlapping. Education, policy, research done in collaboration. And so the next step was policy. And it took about eight to nine years, but at the meeting that was to do the fifth bi-annual in '95 [1995], the group that we had brought together that had been brought together over that period of time said you know it's nice to have this meeting, but we don't do anything. You may, but we don't do anything in between the meetings. And so we need something in between and I said well guys, you know, I was hired, my paycheck says this. This is a labor of love. But we really need something. And so that led to the co-founding, myself and Armon Weinberg, a Jewish individual, to start the Inter-Cultural Cancer Council, which has now become the largest multi-cultural health policy group in the country. That led to--and you know I was just reviewing this a couple of weeks ago because CSPAN [Cable-Satellite Public Affairs Network] covered when we launched it and the reason behind why we launched it. And so they had about a two and a half hour segment on ICC [International Code Council] and the start and the whole bit. But fast forward a couple of years. I was meeting with several legislatures about the idea of research and that research in this area was still siloed and not in the way that it needed to be done. And so they asked me what I needed to--what needed to be done about it. And so I came up with the concept, something that didn't originate with me it originated with a psychiatrist a number of years ago, called the Bio-Psycho Social Approach to Health. And at that time it was the bio-psycho social approach to mental health. I changed it to, to health in general. And wrote up a proposal to Congress to establish a center that would be based on this concept. Congress gave me money, people turned it down. Went back to Congress again and, and someone said to me, you know, you tried it one way, you got it, it got given back which doesn't make Congress very happy. You're going back and asking again, you know, you're a glutton for punishment. I said hey, they gave it once, have to find a different way this time. And so I'll never forget Congressman Ken Vincent, former Congressman now, his Chief of Staff called me. I was in a meeting November 19, 1999, called me up and said Dr. Jones I have some good news and bad news. I said well give me the good news first and then you know let me down with the bad news. He said the good news is you're getting money. I said wow, what's the bad news? The bad news is that you're not getting what you want in terms of money. And I said hey, something is better than nothing. One can always make something out of something. It's hard to make something out of nothing. Fine. That led to the creation of the Congressionally mandated Center for Research on Minority Health. So now the three items, education with the biennial symposium series, policy with the Inter-Cultural Cancer Council, and the research arm with the Center for Research on Minority Health. Story_ID: 23652 Speaker 1: Next phase was the collaboration and that came about by creating the Health Disparity Education, Awareness, Research and Training Consortium, which we formerly, finally referred to as HEART, which now numbers about 30 institutions. And the next step is to make this more than cancer. You know we've started the face--change the face but cancer is one of many chronic disease and disease problems facing our minority populations and the underserved. And so we've now moved to the issue not only of health disparities, but the idea of health equity and over the past two decades. I had the opportunity to meet and learn from, and be mentored by Dorothy Height. I had the fortune of hiring her niece when I began to work on the biannual series and through her niece, helped establish the community engagement programs for the National Cancer Institute. Most people don't realize that, that the National Black Leadership Initiative on Cancer, which I was one of six individuals, LaSalle Leffall, Harold Freedman, Clyde Phillips, Lou Sullivan and myself along with [unclear] White, were the individuals who sat on the floor in the office of the Director of NIH [National Institutes of Health] and demanded a program to address this issue. And out of that came the National Black Leadership Initiative which ultimately led to the Hispanic Leadership Initiative, which led to the Appalachian Leadership Initiative, which led to the Asian American Leadership Initiative, which led now to Special Population Programs, which now led to the Community Network Programs, all started from that. Most people don't know that. But remember what I said, you accomplish a lot when you don't care about who gets the credit. Cause if we had stopped and said you know, you need to know that we did this, you need to know that--it would have taken the focus and attention in terms of the ultimate goal, in terms of making this happen. And today the next step is to expand this. This is a creation of the Dorothy I. Height Center for Health Equity and Evaluation Research, to take the vision, to take what we've learned, to expand it, to address health, health care, health inequities in a global fashion, with Houston being the model. Houston is where America meets. It is one third Hispanic, about one third African American, about one third white and about ten percent Asians. Where else in the nation are you going to have this mix? Where else in the nation do you have such a huge challenge? One third of the population is uninsured. You know if you can solve the health issues here, you can solve them anywhere. Story_ID: 23653 Speaker 1: What are the findings of the Research Center? I mean what, what did we find out about why minorities have higher levels of certain kinds of cancer and what are the-- Speaker 2: It's multi-factorial. I mean cancer is 100 diseases and most people forget that. So it's not one disease, it's a hundred diseases. It has in common uncontrolled growth. But uncontrolled growth can be caused by a number of factors, maybe viral in some aspects like the Epstein Barr virus. Could be chemically induced, like exposure to toxins, pesticides, that's something. Could be genetically related, inherited, such as early onset of breast cancer and that sort of thing. So the key to this that links all of these is the uncontrolled growth nature of it. Someone once said to me normal is abnormal and abnormal is normal. Because the machinery of a cell, the vast amount of machinery in a cell is geared towards division. Only a small part of it is geared towards producing something else. So the life of a cell is to divide. So ours is to find out what is in a normal cell that's abnormal, that drives it? What may be some of the common factors, or there may not be any common factor. But to also realize that there are variances in population and not races. That the whole idea of race in America is an aberration. You, you refer to myself, you refer to you as African American, but as we started this conversation, you saw where my lineage came from. And we can do that for the vast majority of African Americans in this country. Maybe not the same admixture but admixtures. So it's not saying the same thing as a Chinese American who can trace his lineage, early lineage back hundreds of generations to other Chinese. Or a Native American who can trace their lineage back hundreds of years to Native Americans. But our Africans who can trace their lineage back, but African Americans as a race, is really a misnomer. African--the whole idea of races, Native American, Asian American, white American, we are homo sapiens, that's the race, homo sapiens. As a friend said to me when someone called up and said what race you are, he said sapien. The friend said what? Sapien. Is that a new classification? Yeah, thousands of years--sapiens. That's what we are. Now as population and cultural groups, yes. And does culture impact risk? Yes because of diet, environment, where you live and that sort of thing. And so for us to begin to make major inroads we have to take that into account, and that's some of the things that we're trying to do with regards to populations. Story_ID: 23654 Speaker 1: For instance ten years ago, even 15 years ago, when we talked about aggressive nature in breast cancer in African American women, the first thoughts are well they waited too late, or you know, they just didn't seek care in the proper time. We now know for some African American women that's not true. That the disease biologically is very aggressive, especially in young African American women. And it's not just in young African American women. Young women in general, breast cancer for the most part, is very aggressive. It just happens to occur in a higher frequency in African American women. Well why African American women? Well if you go back to Africa, there are areas within African in which the incidents of pre-menopausal breast cancer is extremely high. And if you start tracing that population into the U.S., its entry into the U.S., you'll find there are pockets of early onset of breast cancer that's not even, that is not just in African American women, but so-called white women. For instance in Maryland, Maryland is a Catholic state. Because it's a Catholic state, white women who were brought over early in the history of this country, were brought over as indentured servants. Very little difference from being a slave. A large percentage of them had relations, and some actually married Africans which gave off children. Now some of those children, because they were light enough, retained being white. Some of them became African American. Genetically they may be the same but the phenotype, expression gave them a certain feature that they look white. I have a colleague that we kind of joke with because when we did his admixture, he's about 16 percent African. Yet on his birth certificate, it says white. So would he be eligible for [unclear] since supposedly it works on African Americans and technically by the one drop rule, he's African American. Story_ID: 23655 Speaker 1: I know recently President [Barack] Obama's mother, they discovered that she was related to John Punch, the first black man enslaved in the United States, legally. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Back in the, you know, I guess he dates from the 1600's in Jamestown. Speaker 2: Right, so, so this notion--we have to some, somehow get past that. But I think the legacy of slavery is that barrier that prevents us from getting past it. It's like South Carolina. Most of the people in South Carolina for a period of years were African slaves, both men and female, male and female, white males and Native Americans, male and female. So where did the white children come from? I often joke and say Strom Thurmond was black, he just didn't know it. Or he knew it but he kept it a secret, you know. But we don't, you know we don't, you know, it's, it's fascinating to--we are so hung up on this issue. Speaker 1: It raises a political more so than biological-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: In the many instances [unclear]. Speaker 2: But it's, it is that barrier that keeps us from being great, greater than we are. It's something that we should have gotten over. But I go back to--I'm a history buff. My undergraduate minor was in history, which is unusual for a scientist. But I did. Even more extraordinary, my, my undergraduate minor was in the history of Russia, but I dabbled in looking at the U.S. around the 1865 and earlier. And I happen to be fascinated with Ben Franklin. His evolution over the years. Do you know that he put forth legislation just before he died to free the slaves because he said if we didn't move to do that, it would be an everlasting curse on this nation. Here we are 2012 and we're still discussing the issue. Not in the way that we should, but it's still there. He said it would become embedded in our psyche in terms of the lack of value of human being. And so when I tell people why we have the problem that we have, it's a lack of value. We don't value people in the way that we should and it's on a sliding scale with white men still at the top. And we're now battling at the bottom between whether it is an undocumented immigrant or a black male. It depends on what part of the country you're in, depends on who's at the bottom. Somehow we have to get away from that and I just don't know if we're at a point in time where we ever will. This whole election in my mind is about that. It's--we're at a crossroads in determining where we're going to be, who we're going to be and where we're going to end up. Story_ID: 23656 Speaker 1: This idea of not caring about one's fellow man in terms of health coverage. The whole idea that we're already paying for it in other ways that's costing us more than doing it the right way, is just mind boggling for me. Speaker 2: What would you see as the ideal health care system for the United States? Speaker 1: I, I would say it would have to be one that--the European system is not going to work here. I mean we're too far down that road. I, I think the, the way that health reform was put--the bill that was, that came out was, was not the best bill that could have come out. And it came out primarily because of Civics 101, and that--what I mean by that is we lost it because of one election in Massachusetts. We had to deal with the House version. We could never take it back to the Senate because we're now down one vote as opposed to the 60 votes. And so we're left with this thing that should have been massaged, as most legislations are, legislative bills. House comes in, goes to the Senate, Senate does its thing. Then it goes to a consensus committee. They pound on it, they make it something that's presentable to some extent, and then it goes back to both houses to be voted on. This thing never happened that way. It was--I mean in that bill is the, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shell, 1,051 times, okay. You're giving the power to one person to make decisions with some said this, some said that, maybe you know it's up to you to make that decision. The whole issue with regards to the implementation of Medicaid expansion. The whole idea of exchanges. Well that process works well in Massachusetts. It would probably work well in Michigan, maybe California. But it is not going to work well in the southwest. The reason Texas has 25 percent uninsured. If we implement it in its best form, we're only going to get down to nine, ten, 11 percent. That's a lot of people. And then when you take away the safety nets that were in place, disaster is going to happen, okay. New Mexico, Arizona, southern California, same boat to a large extent. And it's not--people say it's those undocumented, it's not. Yes they're part of it. But these are American citizens that are too poor to be able to afford the exchange, but too rich to be covered in it in terms of being covered 100 percent. They're the out lies. Now in a state that has maybe two to three percent, it can be absorbed by other venues. A state that has six to nine percent, 11 percent, there are no other venues to absorb that. And so you still have this massive pressure on the health care system. Story_ID: 23657 Speaker 1: My suggestion that I put forth and I talk about all the time, is to leave, is to leave the safety nets in place so that you can go through a transition. So that over a period of time you begin to absorb some of these individuals. You begin to work to get that nine to 11 percent down to two, three percent. At a level where these other agencies, these other groups, can begin to absorb them. And that's going to take time. Not a date of 2014 or 2016 or whatever, but a, a gradual period of going through that transition. And both sides are not listening to it because they're both entrenched. You know if we say that health reform the way it is has problems, then we're gonna cater to the other side that says yeah, we knew it had problems and so we shouldn't, shouldn't implement it. And then this side says we need to get rid of it and start all over. We're past that point of getting rid of it. We have to get something in place. And so let's sit down and compromise. And yes we'll have to spend money. And yes it may be a little bit more than we have to spend, but look at the alternatives down the road. A bankrupt country, and not just because of economics. You know I say that an unhealthy nation is not an economically viable nation. And we're getting to that point. And it has nothing to do with supply side. Speaker 2: You mean, when you mean unhealthy, you're talking about the number of people who are going to get sick and suffer from-- Speaker 1: Yes, right. Speaker 2: Because they can't afford to-- Speaker 1: I'll give you a good example. Fortune 500 individual. Child has a head injury. It's not an issue of access, money, but the city he resides in or she resides in, their emergency rooms are on diversion because they don't have enough Level One Trauma Units to fit the city. Individual has enough money to put his or her child on their jet to fly them somewhere. They're hoping that that's within an hour. But the closest Level One Trauma Unit is more than an hour away. The child dies. Is that a health disparity? Yes it is. Is it because he's rich? No. Is it because he's poor? No. Whether he's rich or poor, he lacked access. And he lacked access because that trauma unit had to take care of all these people that lacked access. Because maybe they developed flu symptoms and had respiratory conditions that they had to go to the emergency room and they occupy the bed. And it was enough of them to occupy all of the beds. You can't kick them out. Federal law says you can't. You have to treat them until you're sure that they're stabilized. But in the time you're doing that, those beds are occupied and you have a critically injured person who needs to come in but you can't get that person out. You have to refer them to the next available facility. Next available facility may be 500 miles away. It's not another way you can pan that. That's availability. And that's where we're headed. Houston has only two Level One Trauma Units. For a city, an area, a region some say close to five million people. Not enough beds. Not enough beds. You can be the richest person in, in Houston. Trauma units aren't drive-by a good percentage of the time. They're on diversion. You can't get into them. Is this the city you want to start a business in? People do start businesses here but they don't equate that to their employees. Story_ID: 23658 Speaker 1: Alright. In the beginning when I asked you your occupation and title, you, you gave me a number of different functions. I know you teach, you're doing research, you're doing activism around these medical issues that concern the community. What are some of the, the roles you play now as we speak? Speaker 2: I think my greatest role now is mentoring, is preparing the next generation. I see that as probably the best I can do. I have published papers, I published papers in science and you know, some of the leading journals. I have appeared on the cover of some of the, the leading journals, you know. I was looking at the awards that I've gotten, you know, that are in my cabinet, some still in boxes. And I was looking at, you know, looking at my CV [curriculum vitae] and saying to my, my assistant, you know, I don't need to put anymore on this. It's getting too long as it is. So you know, I think right now it is trying to change, or at least make the system more supportive and accepting of differences. I don't think we've reached that point yet. I remember when I applied for my first job. I applied to 56 places. I got interviewed at five. I got offered none. And you look at my background and what I accomplished and what I came out of, graduate school, and I look at other African Americans in terms of the problems they face. I often wonder are we truly at the point, and I can tell you no emphatically, where race doesn't matter. Somehow we have to get past that, but we're aren't there yet. And we're far afield from that, and that's my greatest worry. Because we're wasting talent that can be used to get us out of this quagmire and we, we aren't doing that. And we make all kinds of excuses in the world. Well we're looking for the best applicant. Okay. We're looking for the most qualified person, whether black, white or whatever. And then when you look at the professions and who are hired, you come away with the best applicant seem to be either white or foreign. Does that mean that the genetic pool, the intelligence pool favor that group? I don't think so. And then you know sometimes they say, I've heard this said to me a couple of times. You're an exception. I am not the brightest bulb on the planet. I just happened to have parents who fostered and supported me and then had people who were able to give me a helping hand. You know as I said, this job came from my mentor because he saw the value in what I did and the value that would support him if he had come here. And that's why I come back to the word value and how we value things. And that there seems to be a lack of value on a sliding scale to individuals of color. Story_ID: 23659 Speaker 1: And sometimes we're our, we're our own worst enemies. I remember when my wife, who's a high risk patient, four of her aunts, her mother, all have had breast cancer. Only one is still alive. So either there's a genetic trait or some issue related to risk. And so she came here, and I would come with her most of the time, and so a few years ago she came by herself and she got sent down to Credit Counseling. And so she called me from Credit Counseling and said dear you didn't pay the insurance. I said what do you mean I didn't pay? I'm a full professor on faculty, you know it's automatically paid. What do you mean I--and you know, and she was telling me somebody came and saw her and said Mrs. Jones, and she said yes. And she said Mrs. Jones, Mrs. Jones married to Dr. Lovell Jones? Yes. The Dr. Lovell Jones that works here? Yes. We made a mistake. You know we're going to take you--dear they're taking me someplace, I don't know where they're taking me. Phone hangs up. I rush over to the clinic where she is. I said where's my wife? She's not here. What do you mean she's not here? So as I'm standing at the desk, I get a phone call from my wife. Says dear I'm on my way to the Galleria, I'm going to do something. I said what do you mean? She said got back, they saw me, everything's fine so I'm going to celebrate. So I turned and I said why did you guys send my wife down to Credit Counseling? Well you know Dr. Jones there was a $25 co-pay. Yeah. It hadn't been paid. Yeah. I said my wife could have written a check. I mean if I know my wife, she was dressed to the nines. She wears my wallet. So well you know Dr. Jones a large percentage of Hispanics aren't insured. I said what's that got to do with my wife? She's not Hispanic. Well you know--I said African--I said wait a minute. What does any of that have to do with my wife? Well you know first hired, last hired, first fired. I said no, what does that have to do with my wife? Our mission here is to take care of people. So what does that have to do with--all of a sudden people start gravitating and I said you haven't heard the end of this. You have not heard the end of this. And then I started talking to people. I said people in asking did this happen to you, did this happen? And I found out that this had happened to other faculty. So it's an issue of value, but the most interesting thing about this, the person who was asking the questions, the person who denied her care, was African American. And so we assume the value system of others. And so that's--so at some point we have to get past this and that's my greatest hope and one I work towards. And I have in my research group--in fact some people refer to it as the United Nations, blacks, Hispanics, Asians, Africans, whites all working together. And in fact at the bi-annual symposium a young student came up to me after one of the evening events and he says Dr. Jones I have to say this to you. This has been the best meeting I've ever been to. The things I've learned. He said but it's not what I've learned scientifically, he said I've learned that people from all walks of life, whether they're racially different, whether they're religious differences, whether they're cultural differences, whether they're political differences, can get together and work towards a common goal. I now know it's possible. And that's what I will take with me. Story_ID: 23660 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: The change in the faces of health. That--the [unclear] did a study on unequal burden of cancer, did a study on unequal treatment. Health disparities is now if not center on people's plate, the thought about, but more importantly, the people I've trained who I will hope carry on that issue and bring it to a proper conclusion. Story_ID: 23661 Speaker 1: I don't want to get you in trouble, but who are some of the people you've trained that come to mind? Speaker 2: Eddie Reed I've helped mentor. Jerry Guidden [ph.], Tim Turner, Amy Snipes, a young investigator who's going to make a mark on this world. Angelica Herrera, who's now at University of Maryland; Denae King, who's now at the University of Texas, Health Science Center at Tyler; Ray Pollack who is head of the Division of Surgery here at M.D. Anderson [Cancer Center]. Mark Clanton, who at one time was Deputy Director of the National Cancer Institute and who's now at American Cancer Society High Plains Division; Tyrone Hayes, who you've recorded as a HistoryMaker. Speaker 1: At UC [University of California] Berkeley. Speaker 2: At UC Berkeley. One of the people that I helped mentor. Worked with my mentor, Howard Burn. I would say Venus Jenus [ph.], Della Mohair, a Latina, who now serves on the President's Advisory Committee with regards to community health workers. I would say Curtis Pettaway whose here on the faculty in Urology. I would say Thelma Hurd, surgeon, top-notch at the University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio. I would also say Angela, Angelina Espaza who is Director of Health Disparities at the American Cancer Society. Rick Kittles, the geneticist to the stars whose now at the University of Illinois at Chicago. I would say some of the upcoming individuals who are with me now. Shelly Hovick, who is going to turn the world on its head in terms of health communications and, and health disparities. Raheem Paxton, who was just recently a Fellow in my group whose gotten a K Award to start his research career. Gene Rafael, a pediatrician, K23 Award. He's over at Texas Children's Hospital. Sean Kimbro, who is now Director of the Research Institute that I helped design and build at North Carolina Central University in, in Durham, North Carolina. I would say Dorcas English who is now a Research Director at a major pharmaceutical company, who was one of my first post-docs. I would say Susan Grigsby, who's now on the faculty at University of Texas, Austin and doing well there. I mean I can give you--I can sit here and probably give you-- Speaker 1: I can see-- Speaker 2: An untold list of individuals. Speaker 1: I see. Speaker 2: From a range of--from serving as federal officials to just beginning. Eugene Rafael, who's a high school teacher and doing phenomenal work as a, as a high school teacher. Hector Gomez, who came to me. Ultimately I think he's going to go back to medical school. He came as a young trainee from the valley who only wanted to be a, a physician's assistant. Worked with me a number of summers. Left here with the idea of going into medical school and becoming an MD/PhD. But also learning that he needed to give back. And so he's gone back for two years in Teach for America to take his scientific knowledge back to the valley to teach young Hispanic students and show them the path that he was provided to advance himself. And ultimately he's going to go back, but he wants to give back to his community before he goes and gets those higher degrees, so those are, those are my stars. Story_ID: 23662 Speaker 1: This is a legacy of mentoring and--but we always ask this question too. When you look back at everything you've done up to this point, what would--is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change it? Speaker 2: No. Because you never know what you changed would change something else. And to me looking at the lives that I've had a chance to impact, I think as my mentor said to me, you know your greatest legacy is the people you leave behind to carry on the work. And looking back on the people that are coming up, the Stacy Lloyds who are still fellows with me, the Lakesha Bates who are still fellows with me, the Beverly Gores who are, who are changing the world in terms of childhood diabetes and, and obesity that we're working on, changing communities. The kindergarten and elementary programs that I've started of taking an elementary school whose science tax scores were 19 percent, to 85 percent when their free lunch is 60 percent of the student bodies. You know to me ten to 20 years from now they're going to be the, the stars and the people that you're going to want to continue to interview. To build and be a part of building gardens in elementary schools and middle schools and taking the science knowledge and distributing it within the school to raise their esteem and show them what can be done if they put their, their mind to it. And I think the greatest thing is what--well one of the greatest things I'd say, is what a principal said to me when I was applying for a grant to take his program to the next level and I was saying you know we might not get this grant. And if we don't, you know we're not going to have this to do that and so forth. And he said to me it doesn't matter. I don't care. And I said--and he said because what you've given us is the basis to sustain ourselves. And we may not get to it as fast as we would have with the money, but we will get there. Story_ID: 23663 Speaker 1: You have two grown children, right. Tell us about them. Speaker 2: I'm extremely proud of my kids. My son as I said is my father reincarnated. But he has blazed a path for himself in that he went to Berkeley, both of my kids went to Berkeley [University of California] so we're Berkley-ites. Both of them graduated in engineering. Interestingly enough, that's what I wanted to do originally when I was coming out of high school, so it must be in the genes, I don't know. He finished in mechanical engineering. She finished in, in civil engineering but then went on to get a graduate degree in structural engineering. He went on to work for a large petroleum company, decided that's what he wanted to do in life. Went back and got a degree in computer, computer, science computer engineering, and then now designs programs for a major foreign company that's based here, that's based, a company that's based in a foreign country, here in Dallas [Texas] and is doing beautifully. And can dictate where he wants to go and what he wants to do. And one of the things I admire about him is that he helped both in support, but in financially when he thought it was needed, to get his sister through school. And then is--dotes on his nieces, niece and nephews, sometimes too much. At least both I and his mother think so. But he doesn't have any kids of his own, but he's married and his wife is also very successful in her career. My daughter picked up my trait I think in that she went back to medical school and got a medical degree after she had been a successful engineer. Engineering in designing some major buildings, major projects. And so she could have stayed in that arena. But she went back and finished a couple of years ago, several years ago, her training as a pediatrician. And now I, I joke and tell her she's a pediatrician to the poor cause she works in an underserved community. Works for a clinic that treats the underserved, and treats them on a sliding scale. And so she's carrying one community at a time. I've done it broadly, she's decided to focus on a community and focus on that. She--in doing so, but she's also, she and her husband whose also successful in his own right as well, have provided me with three darling grandchildren who I dote on. So that's the other side of, of my contribution. Story_ID: 23664 Speaker 1: Okay. Now is there anything I haven't asked you about or that we need to say before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: No. I think, you know I think I've covered all the aspects. The only part that you haven't asked about is my wife. Speaker 1: Okay, well okay, alright. So you all have been married since 19-- Speaker 2: Forty two years. Speaker 1: Yeah, 42 years. Speaker 2: And celebrating our 42nd anniversary now. And as I said at the 25th anniversary, bi-annual, she was the person that maintained the home front while I was able to go out and do the things I did. And I have to attribute a lot of the success of my children to her steadiness at, at the wheel. And not letting my head get too big at times. Ended up being a successful administrator, despite administration was not what she wanted to do. Went back into the classroom to teach English as a second language, even though she doesn't speak a foreign language, and was able to master that in terms of getting her students, most immigrants, back into the regular classroom. And most to do a successful job in the classroom. She's now retired and focusing on her grandchildren. Speaker 1: Earlier this question occurred to me but I didn't ask it. But quite a few people in the sciences who got married when they were in graduate school, seem to have a smoother way, I mean to finish. Do, do you think getting married early helped you, helped steady you out or, you know, make it easier for you to, to finish school? Speaker 2: Well I think it, it made one more focused. Especially having a child early. Because you realize that, you know, you were the, if not the sole support, a major factor in the life of that child. It was difficult. I think my children in seeing that, both married later in life. My daughter married at 28, which is I guess young but not that young. And my son married at 36. So I think both of them wanted to get their careers more stabilized than they saw the struggle that we had raising young children to an extent. But you know, you know my advice to individuals is you know if it's mean to be, it will be as long as you put the time and effort into it. If you're not willing to put the time and effort into it, then you know, it may not be something you want to do. Story_ID: 23665 Speaker 1: Sir how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Whether I made a difference that I think I have, I would like to be remembered in a way that not only tried, I did. Because too often people say I tried, and trying is sometimes not good enough. The adjective needs to do, and that's something I said to leadership in various aspects when they've said to me we've tried to diversify our faculty, or we've tried to diversify our company, or we've tried to diversify this, that or the other. You know I, I've said to them the action word is to do because your trying is not good enough...