 Story_ID: 274336 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Trey Dungy. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Sylvester Monroe, S-Y-L-V-E-S-T-E-R, M-O-N-R-O-E. Speaker 1: All right now, do you have a middle name? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay all right. Speaker 2: My mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] forgot to give me one. Speaker 1: Okay. Can you give us your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 5th, 1951, Leland, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay, and sir what is your profession? Speaker 2: I'm a journalist, currently a newspaper editor. Speaker 1: Okay and you're the editor of, of what paper? Speaker 2: I'm the editor of the Atlanta and the World [sic. Atlanta and the World] section of The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what, what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is, today's date August 25, 2005. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: In Atlanta, Georgia, on Auburn Avenue historic Auburn Avenue in Atlanta, Georgia. Story_ID: 274337 Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, they make me ask people five lightweight questions (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure. Speaker 1: As a warm-up-- Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: And the first one is do you have a favorite color and what is it? Speaker 2: My favorite color actually is black. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: I don't have one particular favorite food, but I like T-bone steaks if I never turned down a T-bone steak. Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Summer. Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Brazil. Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a, there's a couple one of them, it actually I always thought it was a phrase from Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], but it's actually George Bernard Shaw [sic. Robert Kennedy paraphrasing George Bernard Shaw]. And it's and that phrase is, some people see things that are and ask why? I dream things that never were and ask why not? Story_ID: 274338 Speaker 1: Well, I wanna ask you about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Kittrell Peoples] side (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: We'll start with your mothers' side. Can you give us your mother's, your mother's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Her name at the time, her name, full name now is Hattie Mae Kelley. Speaker 1: It's, it's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's M-A-E, actually. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: K-E-L-L-E-Y. Speaker 1: Oh, E-Y, okay? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Now is, is Kelley her maiden name? Speaker 2: No, Kelley is her married name, she, she remarried actually a couple times. Speaker 1: Okay is, can you give us her maiden name? Speaker 2: Her maiden name is Hattie Mae Monroe. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Today's her birthday; she's born August 25, 1932. Speaker 1: Okay and where was she born? Speaker 2: In Leland, Mississippi. Speaker 1: Okay now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side how far back can you trace them? Speaker 2: Only to, I can't go all the way back, my mother's grandmother is the daughter of a slave, daughter of an ex-slave. Her name is Mariah Thornton, M, like Mariah Carey, but Mariah Thornton. She was born in 1876. Speaker 1: Is there a story behind the name Mariah? Speaker 2: No, no I often asked her about it and in fact nobody, it's funny. When we were, when I was a boy, nobody pronounced it that way, Mariah; they called her Marah, but its spelled M-A-R-I-A-H. And you know she lived to be 104 years old, and my grandmother, her, her daughter; my mother's mother was born also in Mississippi. I don't know exactly all of my family comes from the Mississippi Delta. Speaker 1: She lived in, from 1876 to 1980? Speaker 2: Right, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Oh that's remarkable. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In fact actually, and my grandmother, in fact she out, she and my grandmother died the same year, actually she died in 1979, so she actually wasn't quite a 104 years old. 'Cause my grandmother who was born 1897, also died in 1979. Speaker 1: Okay, were there any, any discussions about the 'Oklahoma!' [sic. 'Paint Your Wagon'] song 'They Call the Wind Maria'? Speaker 2: Yeah, we used to; I had heard that song, but I, I really don't know how she, or where the name came from, but that was my mother's side of the family. Speaker 1: I don't know when they sing that, they're singing that song who they are (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I-- Speaker 1: They called the wind-- Speaker 2: --who I, I have no idea, no idea. That is it's an interesting name. The headmaster, the white headmaster of the boarding school [St. George's School, Middletown, Rhode Island] I went to, her, they called her Mayri [ph.] but it, her name was spelled exactly the same way, M-A-R-I-A-H-- Story_ID: 274339 Speaker 1: Are there any stories passed down by your great, this is your great, great-grandmother [Mariah Thornton]? Speaker 2: Yeah, my great-grandmother. Only, only I come from a family of Mississippi sharecroppers, they sharecropped land in Mississippi from the time, from you know time from before my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] was born. And my grandmother was born, the family actually from my father's I mean my, my grandfather's, still my mother's side of the family. My mother's father [Jefferson Davis Monroe, Sr.] actually says that the family was born, that the family actually comes from Virginia and can trace. Now I haven't been able to document this, but according to them, that we can trace the family back to being slaves on President James Monroe's plantation [Highland, Albemarle County, Virginia]. My question always was why in the world would anybody leave Virginia and go to Mississippi? I mean and when, and then I did a little research, and the an- the interesting thing was my family could never give me the answer. But then as I grew older, and looked into things, it's a part of history, as the economy moved from tobacco to cotton, slaves were sold from and moved from places to place. So that my father's [sic. maternal grandfather's] side of the family, his, his ancestors were sold from Virginia and sold to plantation owners in Mississippi to work cotton. Speaker 1: Yeah, I suspect that's probably common pattern (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Virginia had a lot black people enslaved at one point they just migrated after they stopped the transatlantic slave trade. Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, which is where the name, which is at, 'cause I always asked how did we get the name Monroe? And my grandfather said for all that, we you been told stories that actually some of our ancestors were you know slaves of James Monroe. Speaker 1: That's interesting now did, did he ever talk about like where those stories come from, or who told them? Speaker 2: He heard, they were passed down to him from his uncles and you know and his father and grandfather and they just sort of, I mean that sort of oral tradition, oral history people talked about this. They just say well, "Where did we come from?" and that was one of the things that I was always amazed. When I was boy, I didn't put much stock in it, you know when I got older I thought there probably something to this. Now I haven't, I haven't actually actively looked; someday I mean to do that and go try to see if I can actually make the links. Take the, I mean get the names and see if I can trace it back. Speaker 1: Yeah, I suppose the African American Genealogical Society [Afro-American Historical and Genealogical Society, Inc.] could do something about that, because Monroe is not like the most popular (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --president-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and if somebody said they were descended from [President] George Washington (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Washington. Speaker 1: Well they-- Speaker 2: Well they. Speaker 1: Or [President Abraham] Lincoln or somebody you know, but, but Monroe seemed like it might be worth checking out. So, so that's a tra- tradition on your mother's side (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: They came from Virginia first-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Then to Leland, Mississippi. Story_ID: 274340 Speaker 1: So the tradition is that in Leland, Mississippi they, were they enslaved in Leland, Mississippi your ancestors? Speaker 2: That I don't know the answer to, but I think that the [maternal] family did move around much and I think that we probably the, my understanding is we sharecropped farms where the family had in fact been enslaved before. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: That, that's something that happened a lot too. There any, any stories of about you know Reconstruction or, or what life was like down in, in Leland? Speaker 2: I can't not, can't go back that far, the earliest stories the, earliest stories I get are for, are about how in the 1940s I guess early 1940s or a, actually before that. My mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] was still a young girl, the farm or the landowner who my family had worked for died and some land was willed to my grandfather. Who was not an, an educated man, I mean, he could read a bit and he could write his name but he was not you know, I, I don't think he finished, not sure, I know he didn't finish high school, had some grade school some high school. And this land was left to him. Speaker 1: By, by, who? Speaker 2: By the landowner, by the owner of the land who my, our families worked for. And but this was challenged by some white people in that, in that area, perhaps some of that, and I'm not sure of the details. I, the general story is that they challenged it. My grandfather fearing with would happen at this time, we're talking nineteen, early 1940s perhaps, late 1930s, Mississippi Delta. Did not contest it I mean or I he, there was no way real, these are uneducated people, no means, no lawyers. Anyway and even if they had tried to do that, so my grandfather relinquished the claim on the land, my mother has five brothers who are really some of them kind of hot-headed and proud. Who were really upset and said well we'll die before we give this land up, but my father being--my grandfather being head of the family said no. We're not gonna contest this, and so they continued to be allowed to live on a, a little plot there and, and farm this land. But the land that was left to them, we never received and they tell me that, when I, my earliest memories of my grandfather, is a thin man a little bit taller than me about six feet. He had been a blacksmith, fairly robust kind of guy in his youth, but by the time that I was old enough to get to know him, I remember this frail man who smoked a pipe and coughed, had a cough. 'Cause he actually had, had emphysema and died I think of emphysema, but this, but kind of a broken man that I remember. And only as I became an adult that I get that I ever hear this story from mother about how he became a really a broken man after that. He did what he had, he felt he had to protect his family, but it, but it changed his life. And he was never really the same after that. Speaker 1: What was his name? Speaker 2: His name is, his full name is Jefferson Davis Monroe, Sr. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Named after the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --president of the Confederacy. Speaker 2: After the (unclear). Speaker 1: Jefferson Davis. Speaker 2: Yeah his name was fully, but went by Jeff Monroe, yeah. Speaker 1: Now is Leland near Mound Bayou [Mississippi] or Hattiesburg [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: No Leland is near, Leland's on the Delta, near the big, nearest big city would be Greenville [Mississippi], and the nearest major city from that would be Jackson [Mississippi]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There are stories that I've heard about Jefferson Davis giving land, in fact Mound Bayou, Mississippi is land that Jefferson Davis you know granted to some blacks, that some of who he was related to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah that wasn't--I'm not sure that if that if there's any connection there but that was his name. And anyway this got, so afterwards the, the Second World War [World War II, WWII] breaks out and my old, my mother's older brothers join the, joined the [U.S. military] service, and went to war, the Second World War. And when they returned, they returned hearing about you know the promised land, jobs, opportunities in Chicago [Illinois] and went to Chicago. Speaker 1: Did your grandfather serve in the, in World War I [WWI]? Speaker 2: Yes, he did, yeah. We have, my mother still has the photo of him in his uniform and some, and he received some kind of decoration which I haven't seen in a long time. So I don't know exactly what it, what it was for, but there's a photograph of him in his uniform, and he did in fact serve in, in the First World War. Speaker 1: Now that's significant did he, do you know if he over, overseas? Speaker 2: I believe he did and I would have to ask my mother where exactly he served. Speaker 1: I know many served in France. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The French Army (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --absorbed the black-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --American troops because the, the Americans didn't want to have them fight (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: --fight alongside them-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: You know, so that's significant so I mean those, World War I vets were more sophisticated than other people (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --who had not gone overseas and experienced all that when they came back, so. Story_ID: 274341 Speaker 1: Did your mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] talk about growing up in, in Leland [Mississippi]? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. She--I recall she worked the field, she got, mostly what she talked about was working in the fields, going to school. My mother is fairly tall woman, for a, for a by today's standard not that tall, but, but she's a, my mother's 5'9", same height as I am. And what I'm told by my uncles is that she was a really, really good basketball player. And I actually seen from her high school yearbooks the pictures of her in her uniform and a couple of pictures of her actually sort of with the team. And I'm told she was very good and most of my--the things that I've heard about her as a girl was that she was very pretty woman, but also very athletic and a very good ballplayer. And was, but that was cut short and the school somewhat because of the requirements of having to work in the fields. Speaker 1: That's interesting because I've heard other people talk about the importance of girls basketball (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Back then. Speaker 1: --in the South-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in that generation, of women that you, we think this is all new now. Speaker 2: Yeah, oh no, girls basketball was a big deal in the South back then. And my mother talked about, that I remember her talking about how a lot of the, the, they would occasionally play these white teams. And that the girls, a lot of the girls down there were really very tall, (laughter) and very big, and she said you know you would, you, you would play and they set up this wall and you'd have to learn how to shoot over the wall (laughter). My uncles also were pretty good basketball players, a couple, a couple of them, but that's mostly what I remember. And, and, but what I remember most of all is her wanted, is how much she wanted to leave Mississippi, and eventually she did. My mother was not quite nineteen years old when I was born, and she I was, I think about six months after I was born, she headed north to Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Now we can all assume reasons why somebody would wanna leave Mississippi you know things, but because this is a historical record. Are there any stories that she (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well-- Speaker 1: --passed on to you about what life was like-- Speaker 2: Yes, and, and actually when we get to, it, it involves my, my father [Kittrel Peoples], and when we get to my father's side of the story. My mother--go ahead. Speaker 1: Oh I was gonna ask you how far did your mother get in school? Speaker 2: She got to be a junior in high school, in the South, she, she eventually finished school in the North. But she went to her junior year; my father was a high school senior. Story_ID: 274342 Speaker 1: --Can you give us your father's full name? Speaker 2: Yeah, his name is Kittrel D. Peoples. Speaker 1: And how do you spell that? Speaker 2: K-I-T-T-R-E-L and you're not gonna believe this, but he only used the D, I, I do not know what the D stands for. Everything on my birth certificate, on his driver's license, he never tells us what the D stands for, but it's Kittrel D. Peoples, P-E-O-P-L-E-S. Speaker 1: All right is there a story behind Kittrel? Speaker 2: No, no, that just what I, I never heard anybody else, I mean there are people they sometimes mistake it, they wanna call him Kittrell, it's not Kittrell, it's Kittrel, with one L at the end, two Ts one L. His father was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, can you give us his date of birth? Speaker 2: Yeah, he was born September 17, 1931. Speaker 1: Okay, now, well like I we asked before, what do you know about his ancestors, how far back? Speaker 2: I don't know very much at all about his ancestry, I know that his father was fairly educated man. He has, my father has five brothers, his mother died when he was young boy, he is the youngest boy in the family. He has three sisters and five brothers, and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was your grandfather's name? Speaker 2: Hiram, H-I-R-A-M, Peoples. Speaker 1: Okay. You said he was ed- educated? Speaker 2: He's fairly, yeah, fairly well educated man, I'm not, I don't remember exactly what he did for a living down there. Speaker 1: Did he talk about where he went to school? Speaker 2: No, no. And what I should explain as we tell this story is I never met my father until I was twenty-eight years old, and we'll get to that. My mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] and my father were high school sweethearts, my father was a year older, he was a senior my mother was a junior. He graduated and my mother became pregnant with me when I was, I mean became pregnant with me when she was you know a junior in school. My father went to my grandfather [Jefferson Davis Monroe, Sr.] on my mother's side to do the right thing, my grandfather was so upset, now remember I was born in nineteen, August 1951, Korean War is going on. My mother gets, I mean my grandfather is so upset, he runs him off sort of at the point of a shotgun. And then they, they there was a dinner actually, and the, the story gets you know it gets embellished and whatnot. I don't think the shotgun was ever pulled but my gra- father has always told me that he could see my father's, my grandfather's shotgun very near (laughter) leaning against the wall as he came to dinner with the family. And my grandfather says well you know ruin my baby's life what are your intentions here? And, now the story, it's very interesting within the family. The story is my father always told the story that my grandfather was not very happy with him, did not want him to marry my mother. That's the story from my mother; I'm so--from my mother, the story from my father is that my mother was the one who did not wanna get married. She wanted to finish school, wasn't that she didn't like him, she wanted to finish school, she wanted to do a lots of things. You know and you know so she had this baby anyway the short of it is, that frustrated and upset my father decides he can't be with my mother, he joins the [U.S.] Air Force, and leaves Mississippi. 'Cause he said there's nothing to keep him in Mississippi-- Story_ID: 274343 Speaker 1: He [Monroe's father, Kittrel Peoples] saw me shortly after I was born, went off to the war; Korean War on a plane in Korea was shot down, and presumed missing and missing in action [MIA]. Meanwhile, while he is in Korea, my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] stayed in touch with his father [Hiram Peoples] and then my grandfather, my father's father passed. And that the brother, my father's brothers and that side of the family moved away, my mother lost touch with them. My father is then found unbeknownst to me comes back to Mississippi but all my family has now left and moved to Chicago [Illinois], and he can't get any word, he doesn't know where we moved. So I grew up basically believing that my father was killed in the Korean War, I had two things of his, I had a one of the bronze toned photographs of him in his [U.S.] Air Force uniform when he was about twenty, twenty-one years old. And I had his high school football jersey, number thirty-three, which was the number that I, I, in my short-lived football career at 140 pounds at St. George's School in Newport, Rhode Island [sic. Middletown, Rhode Island], but I had number thirty-three. And those were the two tangible kinds of, of things I had to remember my father, as I, as I grew up. Speaker 2: Now is what happened to him when he was shot down? Speaker 1: He was shot down, the plane went down, they were caught behind, behind enemy lines there, and actually were be, were gotten out of Korea with the help of the Chinese. And I don't know, I mean, and I don't know whole lot more details, it's very interesting about as I've gotten to know my father, and we've, and we've become really good friends, like many soldiers like that he doesn't like to talk about the war and what happened there. So I don't have very many details about exactly what happened, all I know is that he was found, he and some of the other crew members were found, and they eventually came back to the United States. Speaker 2: Do you know, have any idea how long he was lost? Speaker 1: I do not know, I do not know. Speaker 2: And when he came back? Speaker 1: Yeah he came back, when he came back we were gone, this would've been late in, late nineteen, no, this would've been sometime in 1952. Speaker 2: So he came back to the States, he was back in '52 [1952]? Speaker 1: I, I think, '52 [1952] perhaps late '52 [1952] early '53 [1953]. By that time, my mother, we had been in Chicago for more than a year, and the ties to Mississippi had been pretty much cut. Story_ID: 274344 Speaker 1: Okay so did your, so your [maternal] great-grandmother [Mariah Thornton] and your grandmother moved as well? Speaker 2: Oh yeah sure, when my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley], when my mother went to, to North to live with my, with my uncle, she took my father, I mean my grandfather [Jefferson Davis Monroe, Sr.] and my grandmother with her. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And my great-grandmother actually. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah and we all lived, in fact, you know you talk about those extended families, we all lived in one house on the South Side of Chicago. Very near now where Michael Reese Hospital [and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] is 'cause that's where actually 29th [Street] and Vernon [Avenue] was where we, where the house was. Before any of that you know Prairie Shores [Apartments], Lake Meadows [Apartments] any of that was ever built. Speaker 1: Okay now yeah so that, that tear, that land now is now Lake Meadows and Prairie Shore (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Prairie Shores exactly. Speaker 1: Okay, but I understand, we interviewed the developer of that-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: A guy name Fred Ford [HistoryMaker Frederick C. Ford], he was talking about how it looked in those days, that was a big eyesore what they say (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah it was a swamp, I mean it was a slum and there was actually kind of, swamp's too strong a word, but it was just fields and there often standing water and, 'cause it was very near the Lake [Michigan], yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, he said it was real, is been like a place where black folks would just packed in and pack-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Speaker 1: Came from the South to work in the stockyards. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So forth you know? Speaker 2: Exactly. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: My uncles came up, my mother's oldest brother and her next two, the next two oldest are twins, they got jobs at a candy factories and various kinds of, of you know factory jobs. Of course in those days I mean if you came up and had a strong back and a willingness to work, you could really do very well. And, and my uncles they actually did, they also had some skills that they had learned in the [U.S.] Army. One's a automobile mechanic the other's electrician, another's a welder. Story_ID: 274345 Speaker 1: --When you think about your parents now you know your father [Kittrel Peoples] and you know your mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley], can you describe their personalities for us and tell us who do you think you take after or what part you take after? Speaker 2: I think I take a little bit, I have a little bit of both of them, my father who as I said I met many years later, is looks, I look a lot like him. He's about my height; he spent twenty years in the roofing business, more than twenty years in the roofing business in California. Which is where he went eventually to join his family who had left Mississippi. He is a very calm, he has anoth- he has a complete 'nother family who I've gotten to know and they adore him. I am his only natural child, because when he would, he was injured such that he couldn't have more children. And we have this sort of, we have many of the same mannerisms, people say that I'm very patient and laid back and low-key, so is he. My mother on the other hand is a, is also very patient, I mean she raised seven; seven of us pretty much by herself. But she is strong and the strength, my father, I'm not saying that my father isn't a strong person, he is. But the strength in the family was my grandmother, grandmother, not my [maternal] grandfather [Jefferson Davis Monroe, Sr.], was the matriarch of the family. And the strength, I learned what I get from her is this strength of these women who, who you know would stand, I mean my mother and my grandmother there, I'm not afraid of, I mean I'm not afraid of very much and there're very few men I think, I mean I'm not afraid of any man really. There's some women I would not want to meet in a dark alley, and I would say that would be my grandmother or my mother having been crossed. I mean these are some of the toughest women that I've ever seen, and they had to be, I mean and that sort of toughness, though I'm not tough, I don't consider myself a tough guy. But that sort of toughness to be able to stand up against whatever the world throws at you that I get from my, from my mother. Story_ID: 274624 Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean and it's and it's cla- it's funny, because it's a childhood memory, and it's the only memory I have, well as a child in the South. And this was I mean I left at six months, so this is not a memory from there. But we went, we visited, went back to the South and I would be, I would say I was maybe three, four years old. And I remember taking this trip, and I remember there was a, I guess she's an, she was my mother's [Hattie Monroe Kelley] aunt. And I'm not sure what she is to me, but they refer to as Aunt Deel, Aunt Deelie [ph.] and I remember my mother, I just remember my mother being so pretty. She was dressed up for, for a funeral, but she had a black dress on and a big hat and the sun was shining. It was really very bright, and they were going to, my Aunt Deelie's funeral and I just remember. It is in fact probably my earliest memory of my moth- my earliest vision of my mother that I can, that I can picture. Her going to that funeral and we were in the South, we had gone down, this would be nineteen maybe 1955, 1954, and I remember us all piling into car, my uncle's car. And driving, I, I, it's funny, I don't remember much about the drive, I don't remember, and I also remember it being oppressively hot. Because I think we went down the summer and I remember being very frightened of this one man who was not in our family, and there's a picture of him in the photograph. Who would say you know, "If you're not good, I'll cut your ears off," and (laughter) and I mean but people used to you know old people used to do things like that. They would say and today, you know we would say that, that's not appropriate behavior around a small child. Nobody said anything, did anything, but I was terrified of this man. Story_ID: 274625 Speaker 1: --Describe your neighborhood I know you started off at 29th [Street] and Vernon [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And what were some of the and, I supposed you moved from there to-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You know too, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: Well, as I hadn't started school yet when we were at Vernon, I was still under school age, and I remember we what I remember most about that is that it was an extended family situation. And that we all lived, my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley], my grandmother, my grandfather [Jefferson Davis Monroe, Sr.], my great-grandmother [Mariah Thornton], my mother's oldest brother, his wife. And funny thing is I don't remember here's the interesting thing, I don't remember any other children, except for me. And that's because I, I'm the oldest and, and my mother's brother actually didn't have any children, at that time. And I think I may be the first grandchild, actually I'm not the first grandchild, but I'm the first grandchild that was there where they were. And I remember us all being at that house, and I remember a sense, a real, you talk about a nesting kind of instance. I just remember being very, very happy and secure as a child in that environment. The only thing to, to shatter that sense of security which I think which is something that had a lasting impression on me. My mother's oldest brother had a very quick temper and he drank a lot, and I remember him and he would fight a lot. And I do remember, as I got older, he had a physical fight with my mother, and my mother moved out. And that's when we moved into the, we moved into our first apartment of our own, by that time, there was; I had my oldest sister and my brother. I have five sisters and a brother, my oldest sister and my brother had been born, and they had this fight. But what I remember is my uncle would sometimes come home drunk and he'd be very upset. And once I was sitting in the, I remember, this is you talk about these earliest memories; this may be my second or third oldest memory. Sitting in the kitchen, it's fairly, the lights are fairly low, and I'm eating, I remember eating some rice in a bowl. And my uncle starts to argue with my aunt, and he hits her and she goes flying across the table. Knocks over my rice and whatnot and I remember, I mean and I don't remember the circumstances or anything, but I remember my uncle being a violent man co- being I mean and I'm actually very close to this uncle. I mean I grew up respecting him and loving him, but I always remember that, and it, and always in the back of my head. I always said you know as I grew older and had some instruction from my mother and my grandmother. Said the one thing I would never do would be to hit a woman, and that was shaped from the time I was, I mean that the seeds for that were watching my uncle fight with my mother and with his wife. In that, in that extended family situation, it's funny, I, I've nobody's ever asked me this, and I, and I never really thought about it. But you know those are some of the memories. The other memories I have of there is that since we all lived in an extended family, I slept with my grandfather; I didn't, I didn't have a bed of my own. And I remember sleeping with him until the time we, we moved out, and when the first time I had my own, my own bed. I remember getting sick and my grandmother was a buxom woman, we called her Big Mama, and I called my mother Little Mama. At the time one of the nice things, nobody wants to be sick, but when I'd have chicken pox or fever, cold or something. And I just loved my grandmother would bring me into the room and put the Vicks salve, which she called Vicks sazz, salve on me and you know Vicks VapoRub. And I just I mean and its funny when you talk about--I mean I grew up very, very poor, in a working class family, but my mother actually was on welfare. Well actually she worked from time to time and then when as she began have my sisters, she stopped working she was on welfare we're in this extended family. Story_ID: 274626 Speaker 1: But I just remember being a happy child with the exception of these--and loved and nurtured and sort of, never--and even though my father [Kittrel Peoples] wasn't there, I had five surrogate fathers. These five brothers of, of my, of my mother's [Hattie Monroe Kelley] and my grandfather [Jefferson Davis Monroe, Sr.] who was, I mean my grandfather was by that time, is kind of a frail guy. I say when I was a little boy, you know he was, well he was sixty you know if not sixty close to sixty, I've never done the math. But he was I mean the importance of grandfathers, something I took for granted until I real, until my own son met my father. And the, the clo- the closeness that they have now is really a thing to watch, and if something, it's interesting that you know my son was not a poor kid. Did not grow up a poor kid, I mean I'm, his father you know graduated from a New England boarding school [St. George's School, Middletown, Rhode Island] and Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and went to work at twenty-one years old as the youngest correspondent that Newsweek magazine ever hire, hired. And so he grew a, he was born into a middle-class existence, but I had something, some things as a child that he didn't. And one of them was that sort of nurturing of this extended family and living in the house with my grandparents, and my grandfather he sort of talking to me and telling me. I mean my uncles, one uncle taught me how to drive, one taught me how to play baseball you know one taught me, when there was father and son night, one would go at school would go with me. So I was not, I, there was no absence of role model, male role models, just not my father. And my grandfather there sort of telling these tales and always instilling to me about how important it was to get an education. And it was only later that I realized what he was talking about because he used to say to me as a boy, he said, "You know you get this education, you get in your head. That's something that the white man, no one can take away from you." It's only years later that I realized what he was talking about, that this land had been taken from him, something he never spoke about. But he was saying you know what you wanna do is you wanna get something that no one can take from you. And what's in your head, no one can take from you. Speaker 2: That's interesting the point you make about extended family you know, we look back on those days and times and said well because of poverty well, I slept in the bed with my brother and my grandmother when I was a little kid. Well you know we look back on those days and say well we were poor and broke, but you know today a lot of peep- people have themselves isolated bored and you know lot of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And dis- and disconnected, I mean isolated, and disconnected from, from the people in their lives. Because we are spending so much time, I mean the tradeoffs are, yeah I didn't have a lot of things, I didn't have a lot of money. But love and attention and support you know just things love, support, sense of self-worth, all those things that come from family, I got at a very early age. Story_ID: 274627 Speaker 1: Where did you go to school? Speaker 2: I started school in Chicago [Illinois] at the Frederick Douglass Elementary School [sic. Douglas Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and its, and it's funny all of my childhood is, is really in Chicago is really in a very small I would say within five mile radius. Speaker 1: Now this Douglas School (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Douglas School on 30th [Street], on and Giles [Avenue], 30, 32nd [Street] and Giles. Speaker 1: Thirty-second [32nd] and Giles, okay all right. Speaker 2: Or Cal- Giles on one side Calumet [Avenue] on the other side. I went there for--I did kindergarten there, first grade and the first half of second grade. Then we moved from there, we lived. Actually we lived at 31st [Street] and Giles so I lived just up the street from the--'cause when we left 29th [Street] and Vernon [Avenue], we moved to 31st and Giles. To another you know tena- you know those, those brownstones, what now which now are selling as condos and are, are very expensive. Speaker 1: Yeah they were townhouses (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Town-- Speaker 1: Well to do at one time-- Speaker 2: At one time. Speaker 1: During the [Great] Depression and the big black migration they became boarding houses. Speaker 2: They became yeah, boarding houses tenements (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In each room. Speaker 2: Yeah, and now they, it's funny how they've come full circle now. They are now very expensive upscale townhouses. Speaker 1: And you were right there with the, what they call now the Gap. Speaker 2: The Gap, yeah, I sometimes forget gran, its Grand Boulevard [Chicago, Illinois] the huge neighborhood there is known as Grand Boulevard. But, so I started there, we moved then to 72nd [Street] and Stewart [Avenue], it's interesting that I can remember, 7021 South Stewart. And I went to Yale Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] for the second half of second grade; we didn't stay there very long. We moved there with my stepfather, my sister's father. And he, it was the only time that he really stayed with us kind of as a family, I remember he worked at the post office from the, on the graveyard shift from four thirty [p.m.] to midnight. And that is the only time in my childhood that I remember having living in a nuclear family, where father got up in the morning. Actually he didn't get up in the morning, he was always a night person, he actually was a bartender much of the rest of his life. But he, he worked at the post office at the time, and I guess they were four of us then, my, my three oldest, no there were, there were five of us. 'Cause my youngest, not my youngest, but my middle sister was born there, I actually remember seeing her born. She was born on the kitchen table, they couldn't get my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] to the hospital in time, and I was sneaking, peaking and I remember it scared the daylights out of me. Because when they took the placenta and wrapped it up in a newspaper, bloody and whatnot, I thought it was the baby, and I went running back to my bed and running back to the bed and but then the baby was alive the next day you know. There at the house crying and so, I never told my mother that until I was, and she said, "Well, that's what you get. When you were supposed to be in the bed asleep, you weren't supposed to be in there looking at that." But I remember (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It really is something to see in those days-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Today you know people have like birthing rooms and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And husbands and sometimes kids watch the baby being born, but it's a, in those days it was unheard-- Speaker 2: No, no, no. No and I actually didn't see you know straight on the baby being born, I was actually, I, I the, the angle I was being peaking through was looking from toward from the back and the side. And so I see the doctor take this thing and put it in, in paper. Speaker 1: And scary looking thing. Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah. Speaker 1: Expecting a baby and you see (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah and I see this sort of mangled I mean this wrinkled thing, bloody thing you know I'm thinking whoa, so I went running. And then and it's funny how you don't you sort of block things out of your mind because the next day, the baby is there. And the baby's okay, my sister, and so I never kind of put the, the two together and then sort of just blocked it out of my mind. Which is an interesting thing because as I said, man I, I and I don't, and I mean I said this a number of times, but I think as I, as we talk here and as I have grown older, the fact, the sense of security and love that I had as a child is so important in who I am today. Story_ID: 274628 Speaker 1: So you started off at Frederick Douglass [sic. Douglas Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Then you went to Yale [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], that's over in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], I guess they call it now (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: And then, so where did you go after, after? Speaker 2: We moved back down to the old neighborhood, to 29th Street, actually between 360 East 20th, I, I, it's amazing that I can remember these numbers. 360 East 29th Street in a little tenement building between what was then South Parkway [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Drive] and Calumet [Avenue], across the street from Dunbar [Vocational] High School [Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. And from there I went to a school called the John B. Drake [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], elementary school which was just a couple of blocks away. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I went to Drake from second, from the second half of, of second grade till through sixth grade, 'cause Drake only went to sixth grade. I re- then I, the interestingly I returned to Douglas School to do seventh and eighth grade and from Douglas seventh and eighth grade, to Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. As a, which where I only went for one year before getting this scholarship to St. George's School in Newport, Rhode Island [sic. Middletown, Rhode Island]. Speaker 1: Okay now let's go back little (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay. Speaker 1: Now how, how do you describe yourself as a, as a little guy growing up on the South Side, were you, I mean did, what were you interested in and what was your personality like? Speaker 2: Well as I grew up, I mean I am still friends today, my oldest friends I met in that second grade class at John B. Drake School, those are, I don't remember really any friends before that. I only remember, and I only remember at first grade at Douglas School the teacher's name was Mrs. O'Toole [ph.], and there was a little girl named Ellen [ph.]. That I, that I sort of thought was, I mean I'm first grader. And that's all I can remember her being very pretty and, and thinking she was very pretty. No more memories, I, I don't remember anything at Yale, about that, that year at Yale except that the name of the teacher, this white teacher named Mrs. Silverstein [ph.], that's all I remember. When I get to Drake though I can remember every teacher by name at Drake School, and my two oldest friends, a guy named Steve Steward [ph.] and a guy named Charles Ray Stingley [ph.]. And I latched on to these guys who we would be friends, or we are friends to this day. And got into that group, a group of, of kids who, though we were from the ghetto, and we were poor, we were good students. And progressed through school that way, always in the top level classes of what, whatever class we were in, doing very well in school. Being in after school programs, the 4-H club which was very instrumental in my schooling, my elementary school years. And you know I learned, I was a fairly decent athlete and a fairly popular kid, as, as I remember. Story_ID: 274629 Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers in grade school? Speaker 2: There was a, a woman, the second grade teacher [at John B. Drake Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] that second her name was Mrs. Boney [ph.] I can't remember her first name, 'cause you know at that time you know kids didn't know the first names of their teachers. They just know Miss or Mr. so on, but Mrs. Boney was my second grade teacher. Very good teacher, she actually became the principal of that school years later, got married and then became Mrs. West. My third grade teacher was, now it's gonna escape me, but I remember her fairly well, my fourth grade teacher was Mrs. Smith [ph.]. My fifth grade teacher, and this is, these are the teachers that actually started to, to matter. Fifth grade teacher a woman named Mrs. Oliver [ph.], the thing I remember about Mrs. Oliver was she tried at, at fifth grade, was the first foreign language I ever learned. She actually started to teach us a bit of Spanish, she was black, but she spoke fluent Spanish, and she tried to teach us. And actually many of the phrases and things that she taught and what little bit, I don't speak Spanish I speak Portuguese. But I remember she taught, I mean she planted that seed, my sixth grade teacher named, her name was Vivian, no, no Vivian Bessley [ph.] was my, Velma Thomas was my sixth grade teacher. She was also our 4-H club teacher, this woman had, had, if, this woman had as, as profound impact on me as any teacher would say for one who I will talk about a little later. I, by that time I had moved from where I lived down on 29th Street and then we later moved to 23rd Street and Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois] had been built. And I, our family moved to the Robert Taylor Homes, 1960, they were opened in '62 [1962], late '62 [1962] in January '64 [1964], we moved there. Best place I had ever, I mean unbelievable to hear, maybe to hear me to say this, but it was the best place I had ever lived. There were doors on all the rooms, it was warm, I grew up in these drafty tenements rat infested, and you know it was just what I was used to. We get to these places, the grounds were well kept, people were, had to be responsible for their kids, if your kids did things, you were thrown out. Anyway, Mrs. Thomas going back to Mrs. Thomas, after school, because I was still going to Drake School which was on 27th Street and I lived at 39th Street, State [Street]. And after sch- and I stayed at the after school programs, 4-H Club and whatnot, and Mrs. Thomas, who had, I remember she drove a Cadillac, Cadillac coupe DeVille, no sedan DeVille [Cadillac DeVille]. And she would drive me home to the Robert Taylor Homes after, after school programs. And you know as I said she was the 4-H club teacher, she helped me to win the Illinois State public speaking contest through 4-H club. She helped me to do a lot of other things. Speaker 1: Now did she, I know there's a, there's a set of sisters in Chicago [Illinois], there's a Thelma, Velma and Wilma, that are all sisters that are educators in the public school system [Chicago Public Schools (CPS)]. Speaker 2: She, she I, she may, those may, they may be her, she, she actually worked at mid- from many, many years, she's retired now. She actually worked at the [Chicago] Board of Education in early childhood development after she left, after she stopped being an active teacher. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think its Velma Wilson, what did she become Vel (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, Thomas was her married name. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. But the, so she was my sixth grade teacher. I then go to Douglas [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], return to Douglas School for seventh and eighth grade, and Vivian, no, I' ready to get Mrs. Bessley, but Mrs. Smith. And I'm trying I will remember her first name, a lovely teacher; I mean she played piano beautifully. And she was our seventh grade teacher and we always, we loved that teacher, and the, the main memory I have about Mrs. Smith is the day that John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was assassinated we came; we had been out to, to recess. And we came back and in the class and she, it was clearly she was, she had been crying, and she told us all to sit down and to close our books. And to close the you know and to get things and to that school was out there'd be no more school that day, and for us to go home because the president had been assassinated. And that day all, I mean when people say to you where were you and what were you doing when John F. Kennedy was assassinated, well I was in Mrs. Smith's. Actually her name was Lillian [ph.]; I was in Lillian Smith's seventh grade class in November 22nd, 1963. Next was Vivian Bessley who was a tough, tough as nails woman, no nonsense, eighth grade teacher who just demanded and accepted nothing short of excellence. And you know at the time, I was really kind of terrified of this woman and, but the interesting thing is that all of us in that class realized, even at the time, that in many ways we were lucky. Because here was someone who, who was demanding excellence of young black kids in an inner city high school, I mean an inner city middle school, and she demanded it and she got it and it paid off for us. Because you know by the next year, I go to Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And you know I'm in various classes. Story_ID: 274630 Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I grew in a Baptist church, my grandmother and my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] you know very devout churchgoing bla- Baptist, Southern Baptist [Convention] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Did they go to any particular church? Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they have been, well my grandmother until she passed and my mother to this day since I was a boy has been a member of the First Southern Missionary Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: First Southern. Speaker 2: First Southern Missionary Baptist Church. Speaker 1: First Southern Missionary Baptist Church. Speaker 2: And it was a storefront when we lived at 20, 23rd [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue] in this big tenement building, it was a storefront downstairs from where we lived. That was the church, we go downstairs and then it eventually moved to, to a new quarters to where it is today. Speaker 1: So it had, is it in a, a church building now? Speaker 2: It's in a church building now on sixty, 67th [Street] and I wanna say, where is at, I haven't been there for a while, sixty--it's either 67th or no, it's 77th and Western [sic.]. Speaker 1: All right now did you have responsibilities in the church? Speaker 2: No, but I, but I, I had to go to Sunday school every Sunday, I had to go to the morning service and occasionally, I had to accompany my mother, or my grandmother to when, when they went to visit a visiting church, or when there was a special program. A Mother's Board program or a Deacon Board program or some program in the, in the afternoon. So yeah, I was, I was raised in the Baptist church. Speaker 1: Did you like it? Speaker 2: I did, you know, I, I grumbled like most children at having to go, but I, there was, one time there was talk, I never had this aspiration. But there was talk that I should be, and in fact I led, I remember now leading some programs, children's programs a number of them actually in the church. 'Cause I was one of the older kids by that time being older, being you know twelve, thirteen years old. But that never you know my mother, never pushed me that way, my grandmother saw it, you know one day he might be a preacher. I never had that calling and actually became somewhat disillusioned with the church as I grew older and begin to see things. And you know how black older, black women was I go I say well Big Mama, I saw Reverend So and So with Miss So and So he was, "Shut up boy, you didn't see nothin'." You know what you, I said, "But I see," "Shut up, go play, you didn't see nothin'" (laughter), and those things as I, as I'm you know I'm adolescence and, and preteen, I began to see these things. And I began to see the people in the church who were saying one thing and I was always that kind of literal child. You know if you told me this is black, and this is white and this is good and this is bad and you don't do this and da, da, da. So I see this and I'm thinking you know the reverend is not supposed to be with Mrs. So and So 'cause she's married to Mr. (unclear) over here. And I see them in the backroom here embracing, kissing, and I mean which I shouldn't see, but and so I questioned this. And you know in those days, and perhaps even today you know that's not something, that's not a child's business, its grown folks business. So, "Go play you didn't see anything boy," but these things began to grate on me about the church. And while I lived there, I had to continue to go to church but once I left to go away to boarding school [St. George's School, Middletown, Rhode Island], I had very little to do with church. Story_ID: 274631 Speaker 1: Was music a port- important when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Music in terms of appreciating it, but and it was, it's always one of the regrets. My mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] who sang in the choir, my grandmother they sang in the choir, I did not. I sang until I sang at school actually until about I remember eighth grade [at Douglas Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. And I'll never forget, that singing Christmas carols, we're gonna do Christmas carols, and I'm singing, and I, actually I had pretty decent voice. But my voice changed, and when my voice changed, it didn't change gracefully. And I remember singing and I remember this teacher saying you know "Somebody in here sounds like a frog." And I just knew she wasn't talking about me, I sang louder, she comes by and she says "[HistoryMaker] Sylvester [Monroe], you need to," and what she did she took me out and she, and but being one of the leaders in the school, the student leaders and whatnot, she had me lead, but I'm not singing any more. But it, it had a profound effect on me because, it, it shattered my confidence about singing. And so when, as I got married, I mean I like to sing, but I only sing in the shower or when I'm alone. And when I got married the first time, my wife used to say to me, "God you should sing" and I said, "Naw, I can't sing," I don't, I didn't, and so even to this day, I don't sing. My brother is a musician, my brother plays trombone I have been around musicians all my life, I love music, I love musicians. And one of my great, if I had any, I have very few regrets in my life, but one of them is that I, I did not--my mother wanted me to play piano. And I was busy playing baseball, I, I was a pretty good baseball player and little league and, and in high school [Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. And so that's what I wanted to do and so I didn't want to play piano 'cause for how I got it in my head that you know it was a sissy thing. That was a word we used to use back then, I said that's for sissies, I don't wanna play, play. She said well you gonna do something, so she sent me to play, so my mother sent me to take guitar lessons. She said well you gonna do something; I said well I'll take guitar, so I go to this guy. After the second lesson, the guy says to me, "You know I don't whether you have any talent or not, but you know it's clear to me that you wanna be somewhere else. And maybe you oughta be and so we should not waste your time or your mother's money or my time and you ought to just go home and play baseball." I said cool, so on I went to play baseball, but anyway that's one of my, one of my great regrets, 'cause my, I had college roommates who musicians that as I said my brother's a musician. I never wanted to be a performer; I just wanted to be able to do what my brother does, when my brother is down or not in a pretty good mood and, and he would go, he played trombone and eventually taught himself to play piano. He would go and play for himself and play himself out of that, whatever mood he was in, and that's all I wanted to be able to do was play a tune for myself. Story_ID: 274632 Speaker 1: Did you have like jobs when you were growing up? Speaker 2: Yeah when I was, my first, I didn't really work; 'cause my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] was pretty strict about you know, you know there was work laws. I mean basically until you're sixteen you couldn't really have a job. The first job, the first thing I ever did where I made some money out, doing something for somebody other than a member of my family was raking leaves. At that house about when I was going to Yale [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], because in fact that was, it actually was, or it wasn't a house it was a three-flat and we lived up on the top floor. And the owner lived downstairs and he would pay me, I don't even remember what it was fifty cents maybe or something on Saturdays to rake leaves. And I, I remember that because it was the first time that someone had ever paid me money to do something, to do a job. My first summer job was in 1967, first paid summer job, there was a program called More Encouragement in Chicago [Illinois] run by the, I, I probably by city. And I signed up for the program and was, and the job that I was placed at was as a copyboy and messenger at the Chicago Defender, John [H.] Sengstacke's old paper. And that's where I got the bug to become a journalist, I spent that first summer there running copy, and I wrote, they allowed me to write a story ['Sylvester Says: "Ugh" To School Bell's Summon']. Speaker 1: How old were you then? Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967], I was fifteen when I started the job, sixteen when the summer was over. Speaker 1: Okay, so you were like, this is when you were at [Wendell] Phillips [High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]? Speaker 2: No, I had (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You had left-- Speaker 2: I had actually gone to St. George's School [Middletown, Rhode Island]. Speaker 1: Let me back track a second (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: And pick that up-- Speaker 2: Yeah, okay. Speaker 1: You said you were a good student (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: And-- Speaker 2: I was a good student-- Speaker 1: In grade school. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And you, you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Graduated from eighth grade [at Douglas Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Go to Wendell Phillips High School. Now lots of my, now if you might recall Wendell Phillips was not, Wendell Phillips had a stellar reputation in athletics. They had championship basketball teams, they had championship track teams, but it was not known for you know its academics particularly. Though (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not in those days, right? Speaker 2: Not in those days, it had been at one time previously. Speaker 1: First black high school (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: In Chicago from what I understand only one for a long time until it was a fire (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --and they built a new Phillips which became DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That what I (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: They repaired the old one. Speaker 2: Right. And so but I went there, so lots of people tried to avoid going there, particularly good students. Many of them if they could, they went to Hyde Park [High School; Hyde Park Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], a couple went to [Robert] Lindblom [Technical High School; Robert Lindblom Math and Science Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and there was an open and transfer program. Some of them went to, one kid I remember a friend of mine went all the way to Von Steuben [Metropolitan High School; Friedrich W. Von Steuben Metropolitan Science Center, Chicago, Illinois] somehow. And but the college, the counselors advised me that what I wanted to do was the, was not to go to Dunbar [Vocational High School; Dunbar Vocational Career Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] but that I wanted to be on a college preparatory track. Didn't mean anything to me, to me really at the time, but I, they told that to my mother and so the, the easiest thing to do. And also I didn't have a lot of money and it was somewhat difficult for me to be thinking about getting on a bus early in the morning and going way across the city, so I went to Wendell Phillips. Story_ID: 274633 Speaker 1: There I met Leroy Lovelace who was my freshman English teacher; this is a guy from Cincinnati [Ohio], very strict teacher. A guy who taught literature with a passion. I mean we were freshmen in high school [at Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], this guy was teaching us 'The Rubaiyat' of Omar Khayyam. And we'd go, "Mr. Lovelace, what's a Rubaiyat?" (laughter) he said, "Don't worry about it, just read it," (laughter). "Look it up in the dictionary." 'The Charge of the Light Brigade' [Alfred Lord Tennyson] and his favorite book of all, a book that I still love to this day which he taught us as high school freshmen which was 'Moby Dick' [Herman Melville]. And you know I've rea- I, I would said I have ready 'Moby Dick' certainly not as many times as he has, because he taught it perennially. But I have maybe read 'Moby Dick' seven or eight times, cover to cover (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now that's a deep book, I mean-- Speaker 1: And every time I read it, I find something that I didn't see before, and he, I mean, but it was, it wasn't just the book; it was his passion for it. And his passion for the written word that be- that began to grow on me. And so I meet, I mean so we started doing--let me back up a little bit more. Back in elementary school, at [John B.] Drake [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], there was a librarian, a little lady named Mrs. McCuen [ph.] who spoke through her nose and she was, I mean if there ever there was a character or stereotype of a librarian, it was her. I mean she wore her glasses down on her nose like this and she spoke through her nose like that and she talked about the joy of reading. And but she got us to, and what she did was she made it a game for us. And so a group of my friends, I told you these two guys that I met Steve Steward [ph.] and Ray Stingley [ph.]. We used to race through books and the books that we read which were taught, taught to us, given to us by Mrs. McCuen in the library, were these lil', biographies. And they would be, we would read 'Thomas Jefferson, Boy Statesman' [sic. 'Tom Jefferson, A Boy in Colonial Days (Third President of the United States),' Helen Albee Monsell], 'George Washington Carver, Boy Scientist' [Augusta Stevenson] and a lot of these were written by a guy [sic. woman] named Augusta Stevenson. But they were a series [Childhood of Famous Americans] of, of stories about, biographies about famous people when they were boys. And we devoured these books, just running through, and then she turned us on to the Newbery Award [John Newbery Medal] books, 'The Matchlock Gun' [Walter D. Edmonds] when I was a boy some of them are, 'Captain of the Ice' [Charles Spain Verral] any number of them that I could remember. But we would race through these books to see who could read more, more of them in a week. And we weren't just, I mean and we were really reading these books; we knew these books inside out. 'Cause she gave us this, she instilled that in us, so the reading part and the writing part as so as I'm reading and I turned I find out I could write a little bit. Mr. Lovelace by this time, we are in his class and we get in this, this is an Honors English class. And so what's helped us to get into this Honors English class is this preparation we've had at Douglas [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and Drake before us, before we got there. Story_ID: 274634 Speaker 1: [Leroy] Lovelace finds one day in his class where you didn't, you never cut this class; if you talk in his class you're in big trouble, the guy would fail you on the spot. And he said to me, he said, "You cut my class one time, you fail," nobody cut his class, you couldn't talk in his class. So one day he says after class he goes "[HistoryMaker Sylvester] Monroe, [Steve] Steward [ph.], [Ray] Stingley [ph.], I wanna see you after class," that's my friend Ray and Steve and me. And we're thinking what have we done, we're, we're gonna get it now. And he starts to tell us about this program called A Better Chance [ABC], and we listened to him and we go on (unclear). Well the understanding, this was a program and the way it was explained was that, this is a summer program. And if we went to this, and we go away on a college campus and if we went to this program, they would teach us math and English and bridge--and here's the interesting thing, I always thought was interesting, because the way it was explained even by Mr. Lovelace was that they'd send us to this enrichment program at and the programs were at Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire] they said and at Duke University [Durham, North Carolina]. And we go for the summers and they teach us intensive math and English to bridge the gap between the inner city education we were getting at [Wendell] Phillips [High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] and whatever the standard is for everybody else. And we thought okay so we took these things, we took these papers, we had to go take the SSAT [Secondary School Admission] Test. My uncle took Steve and Ray and me up to Lake Forest High School [Lake Forest, Illinois] where we did this testing all day. Before the test results and whatnot come back, I get a letter from St. George's School in Newport, Rhode Island [sic. Middletown, Rhode Island]. A place I never heard of before, says "Congratulations Mr. Monroe on your acceptance into the fourth form class," fourth form meaning sophomore year class "at St. George's School." I go to Mr. Lovelace, I say, "Mr. Lovelace, I don't know what this is about, I get this letter from some place called St. George's School saying I'm coming, I'm supposed to go to St. George. I said but I'm just going to this summer program, right?" And he said, "Well that's not quite (laughter) the way it is, you going to the summer program, but now you have this opportunity to go away to this really prestigious New England boarding school." I am not with this program (laughter) I mean by now, I'm a freshman in high school, I'm in the Honors English class, I'm just discovering girls, I'm on the varsity track team. I'm on the baseball team 'cause I can play a little third base and I'm thinking why would I want to go anywhere, I'm in heaven. My plan is to graduate from Wendell Phillips High School, go to the University of Chicago [sic.], University of Illinois, Chicago Circle Campus [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. That was my, that was my dream, at that time, and these people are talking this, that and the other, so. A couple of things go wrong that they don't go, they're not really wrong, they're right but, what Ray and I, Steve and I think this summer program thing is fine. Be good to go, get out of Chicago [Illinois] in the summer, go do this, so first thing they do is they split us up. They send Steve to Dartmouth, they send me to Duke University, they send Ray to Carleton College in [Northfield] Minnesota. Ray it turns out we thought was the luckiest because his program was coed, there was girls and boys. Duke University, I'm done there with seventy-nine other boys, mostly black kids from around the country, same with Steve at Dartmouth. We do this program, eight weeks in the summer, it's first time I've ever been away, first, my first plane trip ever, fly from Chicago to Durham [North Carolina] in the summer of 1966. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now '66 [1966] and Duke, how, how's the racial climate then? Speaker 1: As we were really sheltered because we're part, what had hap- there's seven--eighty of us on this campus, it's A Better Chance program which had started in 1964. I didn't really know the history of it then, I'm the third class. There was a class of '64 [1964], '64 [1964] and '65 [1965], and I'm '66 [1966], this is the third year. This is A Better Chance program it's run by the, out of the old Office of Economic Opportunity, OEO. And it's this money to help you know gets, find inner city kids and give them an educational opportunity. So it's a pretty good, it's a very good summer that we do, and I do this program and come back-- Story_ID: 274635 Speaker 1: And now this thing with St. George's School [Middletown, Rhode Island] is still looming, you know Mr. [Leroy] Lovelace, and I'm talking to Mr. Lovelace about it. And my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] who's a very, very wise woman talks to me and she senses that I'm--it's not that I didn't wanna go, I mean think about it. I'm a little kid who really no, my whole world is the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], pretty much. And, I mean the long trip for me is to go to the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] to visit my aunt that is a long trip. I mean and you know I'd stay maybe a week (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It takes a little time to do it as it takes to go to Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina] (laughter) almost. Speaker 1: Actually, you're actually right, you're actually right. And a real treat trip for me was to go to downtown Chicago, go to the Shedd Aquarium [Chicago, Illinois] or The Field Museum [Chicago, Illinois] or the [Chicago] Symphony [Orchestra], 'cause we would get tickets. And, and these trips I'm talking about are not something that my family's providing. These are, we were sent, we were dis- and, and will bring me back to where I'm talking about this More Encouragement program. We were you know described as disadvantaged inner city youth, and so one of the things they did for disadvantaged inner city youth was these cultural enrichment programs. So they take us to the symphony, I learn to love the symphony and the orchestra as I, I mean the symphony and the opera, opera as I do today. Because as a boy I was, I got taken to the symphony, Chicago Symphony Orchestra. And you know when people were saying you know that you know [Ludwig van] Beethoven's you know Beethoven's 9th ['Symphony No. 9, Op. 125'] was, I mean you know shot from guns and all that Quaker Oats song, I said that's not the Quaker Oats song, that's Beethoven you know, da, da, da, da, da, I have to know that. And also the theme from 'The Lone Ranger,' you know that's the 'William Tell' Overture [Gioachino Rossini], that's not the theme from 'The Lone Ranger' (laughter) and we learned, we learned these things; I mean I learned them as a boy. So we talk about going to St. George's School, my mother says, "Look this is a great opportunity you know. You know and you don't have to do this if you do want, but it will be a shame for you to you know thumb, thumb your nose at it and you haven't even tried it. Why don't you just go, check it out?" So, wanting to please my mother, loving my mother, knowing she loves me and this was always the deal. I never wanted to disappoint my mother because she had been; I mean she's been like a rock to me all my whole life. So I decided to go to this place-- Story_ID: 274636 Speaker 1: So at that time, and, and we've, we've skipped some stuff here. In that I was a member of a street gang, the, the Black P. Stone Nation [BPSN]. Speaker 2: Now how did that come about, how did you-- Speaker 1: That simply came about when I moved to the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois], in order to go to Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], in order to get there and get back safely, I had to join a gang. Speaker 2: Now this is an aspect of Chicago [Illinois] life that many youths (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Don't. Speaker 2: You know in that situation have to face-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: They have to either join a gang or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 2: --probably from being beaten up. Speaker 1: Absolutely, I mean it was impossible to get to and from school at that time, and you know we're talking '64 [1964], '65 [1965], '66 [1966]. Speaker 2: The bad, the worst part of that, that the police always tip- typify all youth as members of a gang (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 2: Treat them like they're criminals. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: So I mean because that doesn't necessarily mean you're gonna be a criminal because you're in a gang. Speaker 1: Right and we got hassled by the police all the time, you know, "What gang are you in?" da, da, da, da, this that and the other. So I joined this, I mean the local gang in the Robert Taylor Homes then wa- and the building of the Robert Taylor Homes where I was, was something called the Supreme Cobras [ph.]. And then, as what became, there were the Blackstone Rangers which you know were out in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois], and the Blackstone Rangers began to grow. And as they began to grow they began to swallow up all these other gangs. So you took the name, so we became, we were the Eye Supreme Cobras [ph.]; we became the Eye Supreme Rangers [ph.], a branch of the Black P. Stone Nation. And all I was to that, I went, I used to go to these meetings at the First Presbyterian, Fourth [sic. First] Presbyterian Church [Chicago, Illinois], Reverend [John] Fry's church 64th [Street] and Kimbark [Avenue], where we had these huge meetings. I mean it, it people I don't think people really understand can sort of grasp the magnitude of this thing. I mean the Black P. Stone Nation at one time was ten thousand kids, or young adults. Speaker 2: I also heard that adults considered themselves members too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Many adults. Speaker 2: --who lived in the neighborhoods. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, run by Jeff Fort, this guy, so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who's then about how old? Speaker 1: Jeff is, I would say about if I was at that time fourteen, fifteen years old, Jeff was maybe twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three years old. And-- Speaker 2: Were you around when [HistoryMaker] Oscar Brown, Jr. organized the big group from the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: --'Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour'? Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes. Speaker 2: '[The] Ed Sullivan Show'? Speaker 1: Yes, oh yeah. Black Prince there I mean Reverend Fry calling that phrase you know Black Princes (laughter) these guys were thugs (laughter) and very dangerous thugs. But and then there were the rest of us who you know I never, the interesting thing is they never made me do anything. You know I just had to, I sort of went along and, and did it so I could get to school. And interestingly, the group of guys that I was with, the sort of tough guys insulated me. I was more like a mascot to this gang, I mean my nickname was Brainiac, 'cause I went to school, and they would say okay let's ask. And they would have some gang thing and they say well you know we're gonna, we're gonna go down on; throw down on this group here. "Let's ask Brainiac. Here's the plan Brainiac. What do you think?" I said, "Sounds good to me," (laughter). And you know they'd go off, but I never had to you know to do any you know sort of, like you talk about gang initiations, I never had to hurt anybody. I never had to steal anything; I never had to do anything (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did they, did they have to warm you up to, to get you in the gang, did they have to-- Speaker 1: No, no, because basically there was some other guys who were pretty good, I mean who were good guys. I mean we were good kids, we just all, we, it was either join or be ha- or have your lunch money taken or worse trying to get to school every day. Speaker 2: So it wasn't no, there wasn't an initiation or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 2: --or deal for you to go through. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: They just basically said you are-- Speaker 1: You are a member of this gang, and if you're not, then you gone get hassled or worse. Speaker 2: It was basically the territorial imperative I guess at that point. Speaker 1: That's right exactly. Speaker 2: Cause you live over here. Speaker 1: Because I live here and this is what, what this is and so that's what I was. So we did that and this gang thing. Story_ID: 274637 Speaker 1: --So going back to my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] and talking about going to St. George's School [Middletown, Rhode Island], and I decided I'm going to do this, and also it was a good way to get away. I mean to get away from that influence, I mean from having to deal with that. But still you know, I'm making it at Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I'm making straight A's, I'm one of the you know I'm a, I'm a fairly popular kid. Because, because I mean even though what I, I would've been considered what is considered today, I would've been considered a nerd, but I had a couple things going for me. One is I was a fairly good athlete, I could run track and I could play baseball. And so that put me in with a group of ki- a group of kids who had a bit of status, who were elevated, I mean even though I got straight A's, I'll never forget this story. Carl Bonner, whose legendary football coach and track coach at Saint--at Wendell Phillips High School. Had a course book, you had to take your grade, and since I'm on the track team, I bring my course book to him, and he puts my grade in for physical education. Because as, if you're a member of the track team you don't have to do regular physical education. I come and I got, he looks at it and the last grade to be put in this book is my track grade. And he looks at it and he says "What is this? English, A, science, A, history," he said you know. "Never been anybody on the track team with straight A's, you gonna ruin a great tradition here, B plus," (laughter). I was so upset (laughter) I mean he killed my straight A's 'cause he just said there ain't never been anybody on the track team with straight A's. And you know, we don't start that now, gave me a B plus. Speaker 2: That is cold. This is a black teacher? Speaker 1: This is a black teacher, his name is Carl Bonner, Carl Bonner. I went, years later, I went, I, I got you know I was, I got an award and was honored at, at Wendell Phillips High School. I went to him and Mr. Bonner he said, "Oh yeah, I remember," I said, "Mr. Bonner, do you remember," he, he denies, he doesn't, he denied that he ever did it, doesn't remember doing it, but he did it. And, and it would've and of course I mean it would've been embarrassing for him to, to admit that. But that was the, but that was you know Wendell Phillips was not an academic school then, it was this, it was a jock school. But anyway, so there I was and des- despite all of that, you know feeling pretty good about where I was. I mean the gang thing was getting to be a little oppressive, but not so much so that I that I couldn't function. And, and it wasn't having a pretty good time, so I said I'll do this St George's School thing-- Story_ID: 274638 Speaker 1: So I go off to (unclear), they put me on a plane, now this is only the second, third, well third plane ride, the first plane ride was earlier that summer when I go to Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina], and when I come back. Put me on a plane to Providence, Rhode Island. I got these instructions to get off the airplane, when I get off the airplane, I'm to take a taxi into Providence to something called the, and get something called the Shortline bus. I get the Shortline bus and the bus is gonna take me from Providence to Newport, Rhode Island. Now this is, I mean as I've written about this over the years, this is a galaxy far, far away (laughter) I mean I don't know from Rhode Island. I don't and I get out here and the other thing too is I arrive and it's getting to be dark. I arrive in the daytime, but it's getting to be dark, by the time I'm on the Shortline the bus trip from Newport, I mean from, from Providence to Newport is about an hour and half, two hours, about an hour and a half. And finally we turn, it getting dark and we turn off the main highway and I don't know if you know what New England is like. But you go into these I mean stonewalls, two-lane roads, lots of trees, whatnot, and it's getting dark. And I'm used to when it gets dark, street lights come on, it gets dark, there's no street lights coming on. And I can see lights over here and far away and far away, and I'm thinking where in the world am I going? And we arrive at St. George's School [Middletown, Rhode Island], now St. George's School, built in 1896, started by an Episcopalian educator [Reverend John Byron Diman]. It's a school, at this point a boarding, an all-boys boarding school, a school for, and they're two hundred about 205 boys there, no girls. It is, I don't realize it or know it at the time, one of the, what's called the Saint Grottlesex Schools. St. George's, St. Mark's [School, Southborough, Massachusetts], St. Paul's [School, Concord, New Hampshire], Groton [School, Groton, Massachusetts], Milton [sic.], Middlesex [School, Concord, Massachusetts], you know Phillip's Exeter [sic.], Phillip Andover [sic.]. These are, these are the top (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What are they called together? Speaker 1: The Saint Grottlesex Schools. Speaker 2: And you have to spell Grottlesex for me. Speaker 1: Saint, S, I mean Saint, G-R-O-T-T-L-E-S-E-X, and there's no such word but that's the, it takes a, it combines, it's a, it's a, it's Groton, the St. Paul, St. Mark and Middlesex Schools. And this is where the elite northeastern people, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], New York socialites, the, the, really the captains of industry and whatnot in this country have sent their, their children to school for, for generations. And you know little Vest Monroe [HistoryMaker Sylvester Monroe] (laughter) Brainiac is now going to that school. So I arrive and I'm dressed, I get there and I get there a little bit at night. Now St. George's School is on a, what's call a Hilltop in Newport, Rhode Island. Up the street from The Breakers [Newport, Rhode Island] and all of these mansions of the Vanderbilt, the summer homes of the Vanderbilts and people like this. St. George's School at one time, there's First Beach, Second Beach, Third Beach. St. George's School at one time owned all the beaches (laughter) they gave them back to the city eventually. I get to this place and it has and one of the things that stands out, it's this beautiful campus, but it has this gothic chapel given by John Nicholas Brown [II], who graduated from St. George's School in 1918. He gives the chapel, donates the chapel, which cost $6 million, to this school in 1921. Story_ID: 274361 Speaker 1: Arriving on the Shortline bus what I was gonna say about St. George's [School, Middletown, Rhode Island] is that it's gothic chapel, beautiful chapel given by former alumnus John Nicholas Brown [II] who of the Brown and Nichols and Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island] family. He's a graduate of St. George's School, and he donates this chapel. But anyway you can see this chapel for miles around, the, the spires, but now for a kid from the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], from the Robert Taylor Homes who arrives at night. And it's also a little foggy, 'cause you're on the [Atlantic] Ocean and it's often in the fall it can often be foggy. So this looks like something out of Dungeons and Dragons to me, and I'm, I arrive in the front steps and I'm think, where in the world am I at? Now I've arrived (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is 1966? Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-six [1966], this is September, and I don't remember the exact date, but second or third week, September 1966. And this guy who looks like he's straight out of the 'Goodbye, Mr. Chips,' he's got horn rimmed, tortoise shell, horn rimmed glasses, he's got a tweed jacket on, patches on the sleeves, his name's Gilbert Burnett [Jr.], and he was my advisor. And he meets me on the west steps of, of St. George's School, when I arrive in this taxi, 'cause you know Shortline has brought me to downtown Newport [Rhode Island], I've now got a taxi and I lug my stuff to the--and I am dressed at that time in my best Black P. Stone Nation [BPSN] garb. I have a alpaca mohair knit shirt, made famous by the likes of [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson and The Miracles and those guys who used to wear those. I have a pair of high waist reversible pleated zip backs we called them baggy pants, pleated pants, I have a pair of black and white Stacy Adams wingtip shoes with the, the kind that you can see the, the threads, white threads. 'Cause you wanted the threads to be clean, and I have a black hat with a black and white weaved band, white feather in it and a pair of dark glasses. It's about eight o'clock at night and Mr. Burnett sees me and says, "Do you have other clothes," and I'm thinking he's admiring these, and I said, "Yeah, just like this." And so (laughter) the next day, he takes me in his Land Rover, he, he drove a Land Rover to a place called the Anderson Little knitting mills they buy me a blue blazer, two pair of grey flannel slacks, no cuffs, no pleats, couple of Oxford button down collar white shirts. And a pair of black tie shoes that we used to call insurance man shoes, they (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were popular by the insurance industry. Speaker 1: Yeah. And because he said that my shoes will not do for Sunday chapel, and what he was trying to do, I didn't realize it at the time, was to get me to fit in at St. George's School. 'Cause I would have been a laughingstock, you know dressed the way I was dressed at this place. Speaker 2: Back in Chicago you would've been you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I was cool, I was cool that's the way-and, and interestingly enough when I would return on vacations, I would leave St. George's School dressed the way I should be dressed at St. George's. But we would always, I would often couple of times I went through the Port Authority. But they would do they would hire a bus, charter a bus and take us to the Port Authority bus station. From there, we would go to the airport, various airports or whatnot, and in the Port Authority bus station, I would change back into my Chicago garb. Because there was no way I was going back down to Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois] looking like I looked at St. George's School. Speaker 2: That would've upset the whole P. Stone Nation. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah and upset me. So anyway, I do this, I'm, I'm there and they take me my room, Gilbert Burnett takes me to my room, it's a single room, it's got a bed, a dresser, a desk. There's a blanket and some bedding folded up there, I go in there and I'm not really a tough guy, never have been. Never represented myself as that even though I was part of this gang, and I go there, I'm, I'm fifteen years old. And I sit on that bed and start to cry, I have never been, felt more alone or more frightened in my entire life. Because I'm halfway across the country, I'm on a thousand miles away from the South Side of Chicago to a place I have never set foot before in my life. I, I, there is no, not a soul that I know anywhere within a thousand miles of me. And I'm alone, I mean and, and frightened, because I had no idea what to expect, I don't know from boarding schools. And as I said, I just sat down, and nobody ever knew I cried, I never let anybody (laughter) see me cry, so I said okay, I'm gone make this good. I'm gonna stay here maybe ten days, two weeks, 'cause my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] has told me if you don't like it, you can come home. And so I want to put on a good show, we go through and I'm meeting these people and it's okay and somewhat, so but my plan is I don't intend to be here more than you know couple weeks at the most. Story_ID: 274362 Speaker 1: So around about--I'd been there [St. George's School, Middletown, Rhode Island] maybe a week and a half, I get sick and they put me, I can't keep anything down. And they put me in the infirmary overnight, doctor comes checks me out, doesn't say anything. And so I say to the doctor, I said, "So Doc, what's the matter?" and he says, "Well I think you just suffering from a really bad case of nostalgia." Nostalgia was not in my vocabulary at the time, I thought nostalgia was a serious ailment. And I'm thinking this is great, you know, I got this nostalgia stuff and I'm gonna call my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley], I'll tell her that you know these people are weird here. They dress funny, they eat weird foods, 'cause I had never heard at that time, of chip beef on toast nor had I ever heard of Welsh rarebit, which is simply melted cheese on toast. But I thought they were saying Welsh rabbit, and so I'm gonna call my mother, I'm a tell her what, I'm a, so I say I can't wait. So I get my mother on the phone in my best voice best, kids you know how kids don't wanna go to school, don't wanna do something? They get, they get put on this sick voice, so I call her up, I say, "Hi ma." She says, "Hey baby how you doing?" I said, "Oh, I'm sick, I'm really sick, I'm in the infirmary, this (unclear) place is weird, the sheets always damp, it's foggy. These people all talk funny, you know they eat strange foods, I mean they do really terrible things to rabbits. They kill rabbits and they put them, and then they cook them up and they pour it over this stuff, they call it Welsh rabbit. And they eat some stuff called chip beef on toast and it's just, it's really bad." And she said, "So, what did the doctor say?" I said, "Well, he said I got this really, really, really, really, really bad case of nostalgia." Unfortunately for me, nostalgia was in my mother's vocabulary (laughter) and she says, "So what else did the doctor say?" I said, "Well he didn't say much but you know I think I ought to come home," and then there's a silence. And she says, "There is no way. The only way you're coming home before you're supposed to is if it's in a box." And I can't believe what she's saying, I saying wait a minute, something's wrong here. She's told me if I don't like it here, I can come home and I, I mean I just told her how awful this place is. And I planning my trip home and she's saying no way, you gonna stay there. And for a minute I felt really betrayed because she told me I could come home. Now years later, I talked to my mother and I've told this story many times, but--I've written about it, and I told, and she said it was the hardest thing she ever did in her life. Was to not let me come home because she said she feared if I came home, if she let me come home, I would never leave again. I would never try anything, I would never venture anywhere, and she knew that I should be there, that you know this is a huge opportunity. I couldn't see it at the time, I don't know I'm fifteen years old, what do I know? But she did and she said it was just, it was--she said she, she said she didn't cry all that night because she said there's no way you can come home. Well, I decide okay, I'm not loved at home, whatever I can't go home again, and that's the kind of person--you asked me which one of my, which one of my parents was I like. And one of the things I think I get from both of, both of them, which is a thing I think is true of many African Americans which is I'm a really adaptable guy. I mean I can adapt, I mean I figure out okay this is what it is, I mean I adapted to being a member of the Black P. Stone Nation. I adapted to living in the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois], I adapted to, to and so I'm at this place now, I'm here, I said well, you know I'm not ducking bullets. It's clean, it's quiet, these people, maybe they aren't so bad, I'm never gonna like this Welsh rarebit stuff (laughter). But I might be okay, so I, I set, settle down-- Story_ID: 274363 Speaker 1: And one of the things I had a concern about is whether I could do the work. 'Cause I remember before I left, some of the teachers had said to me, try not, I don't think they tried to scare me. But they had said you know you been hot stuff around here, you get straight A's; you get this, that and the other. You do well here, but now you going off with the cream of the cream, you're gonna be with doctors' sons and lawyers' sons, and judges' sons and legislators' sons, and you gonna be really tested. Well that, those, that resonated in the back of my head, and I'm thinking you know I'm from the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], from the Robert Taylor Homes; I go to Wendell Phillips High [School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]. I went to Wendell Phillips High School, can I really do this? But you know I don't dwell on it, and I apply myself and roundabout, I don't go home for Thanksgiving that first, fir- first year, 'cause there's no money. So I stay at the school, and one of the teachers invites me to stay with him and its fine. Just before Christmas, the first grades come out and I remember something that my aunt said, my aunt on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] who I used to go see. And I had told her I said you know I'm going out there with doctors' sons and lawyers' sons and da, da, da, da. And she, I said, "I'm a little scared." She said, "Don't you be scared honey, just remember, you had a son." And so the grades come out and look and behold, lo and behold, I'm third in the class, by academic ranking. And I go wow, hmmm, I can do this, I can do this, and after that I never really had any kind of doubt again about it. And one of the things later in life I always said and it's--when we started talking after I, one of the reasons I wanted to talk about those teachers and what they gave me. I believe in public education, and I'd always said I would never send a child of mine to a place like St. George's School [Middletown, Rhode Island]. Not because I didn't do well there, because I actually grew to love the place, became a member of the Board of Trustees, gave a commencement address there. And done all kinds of things, been back many times, I love the place. But I said why should we have to make that kind of sacrifice? Leave everybody you know and love, I mean be, sending a kid off like that. But that was, that part of me that had been, that little boy had been scared, and you know I said, I'm never gonna do this. But I thought those teachers that I had at some of the worst what were believed to be some of the worse inner city public schools certainly in Chicago, if not in the country, must've done something right for me to be able to go without any real bridge. I had that summer at Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina] studying math and English, but it wasn't, I mean that was actually pretty easy and that was a lot of fun that summer. But to be, to go in there and be able to handle that work and do that, those, those African American teachers in Chicago--and I will never, I mean I've always my whole life I've been grateful to them. To the Vivian Bessleys [ph.] and to the Lillian Smiths [ph.] to the, you know the Leroy Lovelaces, the people who said just because you from the Robert Taylor Homes and just because you black and you poor, doesn't mean you can't learn. And learn with the rest of with the best of them. And I have always carried that and always been grateful about that so, there I was and from St. George's you know. From there on it wasn't, I wouldn't say it was easy, but you know it was just like anybody else there-- Story_ID: 274364 Speaker 1: Now you had your own room there? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Did everybody have their own room? Speaker 2: Yes, and occasionally only when I became a senior, and by choice did I have a roommate, a guy from, from Providence, Rhode Island. His name is David Pascone his family's from Sicily [Italy], Pascone, and when they came here, they changed his--his father was a career naval officer. But they lived in the Federal Hill section of Providence where some of the biggest so-called Mafioso guys were; in fact his family gave me a tour once. Pointing out the houses of you know and this is you know, this guy Big Tuna, dotty, dotty da (laughter) because they all knew them in the neighborhood. Speaker 1: Okay, so were they any other black students at St. George's [School, Middletown, Rhode Island]? Speaker 2: There were, together there were about six of us all together out of about 205 boys, no black student had ever graduated from St. George's by the time I got there. No Latino student had ever graduated from St. George's, no, no Latino student had ever gone to St. George's only, I think there was one other Jewish, there was one Jewish student at the school at the time who I think was a year ahead of me and he probably, I think would've been the first Jewish student to graduate from there. But this was an exclusive; I mean this is a real up-scale exclusive place you know for the cream and cream of, of white society. White north, northeastern, I mean there weren't even people from California (laughter) at this school at the time. So the six, I mean six of us black students there, two guys, I'm the third student to graduate, third African American student to ever graduate from St. George's. The first two graduated the year before I did in 1968, I graduated in 1969. In fact, I just saw Victor Hall whose, whose actually been doing some work. Victor Hall was from Mount Vernon, New York, and Richard Cooper was from Cleveland, Ohio. They were, they were two, two guys ahead of me who graduated before me. Speaker 1: Okay so are there any teachers at St. George's that you remember when you were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, in fact there were no black teachers at St. George's, the only black male person, the only that I saw at St. George's School until, the only African American male person was a guy named Theo who was the janitor; he was the custodian at the school. Archer Harman Jr., who was the headmaster of that school, graduate of St. Paul's [School, Concord, New Hampshire] and Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], he just passed. And I actually wrote a, a little, I couldn't be at his memorial service, this man integrated St. George's School. He, he led that school and what he, part of his legacy to that school is that he, when people were saying well this, we need to go slow with this integration thing. We need to see if these black kids can really do this, and we don't want to change the character of this school and da da then go slow. He was like you know hey, this is not an experiment, these kids can do this, we need to come in--he had a phrase, call the larger life of the world. We need to bring St. George's into the larger life of the world; the Hilltop is decisively a place. Anyway, he just passed, and I wrote this, this little tribute to him saying how much I appreciate it. You know what I didn't understand at the time him doing that, and what a real fight it was. 'Cause there were people--he had threatened to resign, because people thought he was going too fast. This guy Chris Corkery, who also just passed Gil Burnett [Gilbert Burnett, Jr.] who I talked about, there were a number of good teachers there. Here's, I mean and, and it's these things have shaped my life because I mean I had that foundation. From my family and then from those African American teachers in the inner city public schools. And then I had the good will of these white men 'cause they were I mean all the teachers were male at St. George's School who later became personal friends of mine. Who believed in what they were doing and who believed in us black kids and believed in us being there. And made it at, I mean as traumatic as it was in some instances for us, without those guys and without their commitment it wouldn't've worked. Story_ID: 274365 Speaker 1: How did you decide to what college to go to? Speaker 2: That's a funny story. By this time I've done, by the time we start thinking about colleges, I've done very well. I'm head of the Afro American Society, student's society there [St. George's School, Middletown, Rhode Island], I'm the editor of the, the school literary magazine, I'm, I'm actually a pretty popular kid. I'm the first black prefect at the school. Prefects are, there's a senior prefect which is, which is like the president of the student body. And then there are five, four other seniors and they're called the senior prefects, they actually run the school, outside of the classroom. And I was the first black kid ever elected as a senior prefect, and so I'm doing pretty well, always within the top certainly always in the top ten of my class. Now remember there's only fifty-two kids in my cla- my graduating class, but I'm always in the top ten, usually higher than that, but no lower than that. Speaker 1: Top five or so, five or six (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right. And comes college recruitment time and I always, I mean I don't know why, I always wanted to go to California, and so I talked about. A recruiter comes and talks about going to Stanford University [Stanford, California], and I remember my college advisor, a guy name Bill Skank [ph.], saying to me, Stanford, Smanford, you're going to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. I said I didn't know I mean and 'cause Harvard, these schools many, St. George's School and many of these schools were feeder schools to the--what they did they fed students to the Ivy League colleges. And St. George's used to, I mean in my, from my class of fifty-two students at St. George's School, seven of us from that class went to Harvard. And that was pretty routine in those days, so that's how I ended up, I mean I applied, I applied to one and I say. And I don't like to say this 'cause people think I'm arrogant and have a big head, it wasn't that at all. This was, this was destined, I mean I had done the work, they had the connections there, the recruitment things. I apply, I'm told to apply to Harvard, I apply to one college, Harvard, I get into Harvard, I go to Harvard (laughter) and the rest they say is history. Story_ID: 274366 Speaker 1: Now that's something when you look back where you came from that's just, that's almost unbelievable. Speaker 2: Yeah. It's a long way from the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois] to being a freshman at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: How did you adjust socially, I mean was it difficult to go back and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, it, it. It, it was somewhat difficult, it was more difficult actually in my family, in my house than on the streets. Because I was, I was wise enough not to come back and bring you know come back talking this St. George's [School, Middletown, Rhode Island] stuff. In fact, the guys (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Don't be more of a brainiac- Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter) in fact the guys on the street, they never quite understood, they thought, they called me so after they stopped calling me Brainiac; they called me Big Time Vest [HistoryMaker Sylvester Monroe]. That was and because they, they said "Big Time Vest, gone to the Big Apple," and I was saying Newport, Rhode Island. And they just for some reason either refuse to hear what I was saying or equated Newport with New York [New York] and the Big Apple and dotta, dotta, so they said, "Big Time Vest gone to the big time." And so I did you know something said, and I kid, I never rationalized it or reasoned it out this way, but something said when you come back in the summers, you should, you should not even really talk much about what goes on in Newport, Rhode Island, and I didn't. Where I did that was at home with my sisters and my brother, my oldest sister, and I my older sister in some ways really resented it. I came home and when at, at St. George's we had formal sit-down dinners and lunches every day or dinners. The lunches we sat, lunches were buffet, but you sit down, there be waiters, you had to take your turn waiting tables. There's a full place setting, I didn't realize how to actually, first of all I had no idea what all these utensils were. Where we ate, I mean I get a fork, I might need a knife, I might not, or I may need, if we're having some soup, though rarely did I eat, in our house did we eat soup the way you eat soup you know as part, as a first course of something. If we had soup, that was the meal. So I didn't know which fork, there were two forks on the left side, two spoons on the right side, a knife and sometimes a spoon and a fork up above the plate. And I'm saying what is, what are all this, and so what I did, as I said, I'm very adaptable, I--and then there were, when we would eat there be a master or a teacher sitting at head of the table. I would wait until the master picked up one of the utensils, and whichever one he picked up, that's the one I picked up. And I eventually learned how to do things like that so, now I take this home and I'm saying wouldn't it be nice--now we never except Christmas, Thanksgiving, Easter did my family ever really sit down all you know at a table all of us together and have a meal, it's catch is as catch can. I mean you know we had meals where I mean, there, there so, my grandmother or my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] somebody would bless the table. Then everybody get their plate go wherever they're going or we sit here and this there. That's just the way it was, I mean it was in, where I grew up. I said, "Why can't we all have dinner together, why can't we all sit down, let's set the place settings here, set place settings and you know be a family?" My sister goes, "Hey buddy, you can leave that St. George's BS where it is. Tthis is not St. George's School, and we don't wanna hear about all of that. And we're not doing none of that," I mean, and I never really quite understood. I well actually I do understand what part of it was that my mother as wise as she was, occasionally she would slip and say to them, "Why can't you be more like your brother? Why can't you go?" The worst possible thing she could do to me is to hold me up to my you know to my sisters and my brother when they weren't doing or measuring up and say. And so my sister, my older sister really resented it, she didn't wanna hear it, so I backed off of that. And, and but for the most part, I didn't have nearly as much trouble as a lot of other African American students at St. George's did going back and forth. Story_ID: 274367 Speaker 1: In the summertime would you; would you stay in Rhode Island? Speaker 2: No, I always came home; I always came home in the summers. And which, which brings us back to that summer the More Encouragement program, my first, you asked me about my jobs. So my first job, the summer of 1967 'cause I've gone to school, this is the first summer back from St. George's School [Middletown, Rhode Island]. And the More Encouragement program and this program sends me to Chicago Defender, John Sengstacke's newspaper at the time, where man, where I met a man named Sam Washington. Who would later worked for the Chicago Sun-Times and later worked for Time magazine. Audrey Weaver who was the--Sam was the, was the city editor [sic.] at the time, a woman named, black woman named Audrey Weaver was oh, she was, she was an editor and I can't remember which editor [city editor]. Anyway I did these, these, I worked there as a copy boy and for the end of the summer they let me write a story, and ran my picture, and ran it in the paper. And seeing that was the first time I had ever been published anything I had written had been published with my byline on it. And that just, me seeing words that I had written, no excuse it was the first time I had been published in a, in a professional newspaper. Because I had been published, I was editor of the news magazine and had written for the paper at school. But that was a big deal to, to do this and I just caught the bug. So the next summer, summer of '68 [1968] I go back, More Encouragement program is not running this year, and they paid, the city paid my salary, not the Defender. I was placed there and people in that program got placed in all kinds of businesses. Some at Johnson Publication [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] some at--and not all in journalism, so I go back and I, I want a summer job. And Mr. Sengstacke said naw, we got nothing for you, can't do it, I said look I just wanna, I just wanna be here in the newsroom, I wanna hang out, and they wouldn't let me. So I ended up taking a job, needing a summer job, and I washed cars, a friend of mine had gotten a job at a car wash on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois]. We had to get up, and that was only two days a week, that was on Saturdays and Sundays. And we get up at four o'clock in the morning and be there at like six, seven in the morning, wash cars all day long till 6:30 at night. And we might, if we were lucky, we might make twenty bucks, and which wasn't bad, I mean you know it was twenty bucks more than I, than I had. And, and I wasn't really scoffing at it, so I did that, then I got a job on at a restaurant called Mr. Zee's [ph.], 26 [26th Street] and Wabash [Avenue] as a grill man. And I'm doing this job, been on it for about two weeks, and it's really hard work, and so I didn't mind doing the grill, but when the, when things slacked off, and you weren't doing a, the best time the busiest time was during lunchtime. And things slacked off, then I was supposed to do, so I wash some dishes. And I wash all the dishes that I could wash, and I'm standing there and I happened to pick the newspaper, so by now, I used, I mean I got, gotten this newspaper bug. And I love, I love reading newspaper, Mr. Zee comes by he goes oh, I don't pay you to read the news, I said, oh I washed all these, he said yeah see those onions over there; you know you can start cutting some of them. So I remember standing there, and I don't know how to cut onions, so I'm cutting these onions and there's tears just running down my eyes. And I'm not crying it's just from the onions, and I'm thinking to myself, you know it got to be a better, better way than this. But you know, and I'm being paid a dollar at that time, being paid a dollar twenty-five cents an hour, so you know you figure, you do the math I mean I work all, and it's a full-time summer job. I don't know what I was bringing home, but it wasn't very much, around about the middle. Oh that previous, that previous year, before I got out of school as the editor of the literary magazine I had done a story at had not, it wasn't a story. Well I wrote the story and then I queried all the living alumni of St. George's School, asking them whether a boarding school education was worth it? I took these responses and I wrote a story. One of the people, who was queried, was the advertising director of Newsweek magazine who saw this. Sent me a letter said he was really impressed. Story_ID: 274368 Speaker 1: First before we go there, I'd ask you about your friends Ray [Stingley (ph.)] and Charles [sic. Steve Seward (ph.)]. Speaker 2: Okay. Well (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How they fared, because they both had-- Speaker 2: Similar. Speaker 1: Free scholarships too-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Ivy League, not Ivy League or did they go (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: Or did they go to-- Speaker 2: No they went to, they went to, Steve as I said, they sent us to the summer programs, they sent us to, to different places Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire], Carleton [College, Northfield, Minnesota] and Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina]. Then we ended up going to--Steve who went to Dartmouth for the summer program ended up, there was an ABC [A Better Chance] program at the Dartmouth campus and at, at--well at Hanover High School in Hanover, New Hampshire, which is where Dartmouth is. And they had a, they lived in a house with a, a tutor, AB- A Better Chance tutor. And he did very well there, Steve graduated from Hanover and went to Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois]. Ray who never forgave Mr. [Leroy] Lovelace the teacher who sent us for, for this, because one of the ways they determine which school they would send us to was based on the recommendation from Leroy Lovelace, our freshmen English teacher [at Wendell Phillips High School; Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] who had discovered this program and, and sent us away to it. Got us in the ABC program in the first place, because he wanted to get us away from you know bad influences and gangs and whatnot in Chicago [Illinois]. So he always, in his recommendation for Ray he apparently wrote and he, he never denied this, he never told us what. But we--Steve, Ray was told he said, "Ray is a very good student, but often needs a kick in the pants and some discipline." So they sent Ray to Culver Military Academy [Culver, Indiana] (laughter) where he was the only senior to graduate without rank. Because he decked a, a senior, an upperclassman and a, and a ranking officer, but he did graduate and did very well. He went to, he then went to Albion College in Albion, Michigan. Steve, as I said went to Northwestern University, Steve was the most tragic story of all of this, of all these. In many ways I always thought Steve was the smartest of the three of us because he had this mind for mathematics, he was, he just had a, a brain for numbers. He gets to Northwestern and he becomes the, the dope man, now here's one of the, one of the things that happened. The mistake I think that was made was where my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] was so wise when I went to St. George's [School, Middletown, Rhode Island] for her not to let me come home, Steve had the opportunity to go to Dartmouth to college. And but he decides to come back and go to Northwestern, where he can get on the train, the "L," [elevated train] and come back to the projects. And he does this a lot, he's going back and forth, and he's not applying himself. And then he realizes that as, as a lil' entrepre- because he, I mean we all didn't do drugs at the time. But he became a supplier of marijuana, pills this kind of thing, cocaine wasn't really you know big deal. Speaker 1: Now was his connection from those drugs (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Down in the projects. Speaker 1: Down in the projects? Speaker 2: Yeah. And he would take, and he would do that. So he gets kicked out, not for that, not for the drugs, but just simply he's making this money and he's doing other things and he's not going to class, he's not going to school. So they say look take some time off as they do at these schools, as they do at Har- the Ivy League schools, they said you not applying, they say take a semester off. Take some time off; get yourself together come on back. Story_ID: 274369 Speaker 1: Well he takes this time off, and while he's off he gets a job at the post office and he finds that his business that he was doing at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] is even a bigger business. Because he now starts to supply people at the post office and he starts doing his own, his own wares. April first, 1979, never forget, its April Fool's Day, 1979, I had been working, we're out of school. Steve [Seward (ph.)] never went back, never went back to school, Steve gets; he's running around through the Lake Meadows Shopping Center [Chicago, Illinois] with a sheet on, nothing else. And he gets locked up in Tinley Park mental hospital [Tinley Park Mental Health Center, Tinley Park, Illinois] and, and things started to unravel pretty much after that. But the way it got to that was you know he, he just never, he never went back to school. The other thing I remember is that Steve, Charles [ph.] Ray [Stingley (ph.)] and I went up to Northwestern to pick him up. I'm driving my mother's car, I drive up there, he has his stuff, we bring him home. And we drop him off at the, at the house and we say well we gone go man 'cause we're just figuring he's just gotten kicked out of Northwestern, he's got some, he's got deal with his mother. The way Steve tells the story, he goes upstairs and he's, his mother confronts him and, not even confronts him. She says well Steve and she says what you gone do now I mean and he says I don't know and she says, "Well if you okay with it Steve, I'm okay with it." Now Steve tells that story and I say you know I can't imagine being kicked out of Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Arriving back that first day and there's not some major, major, major you know consequences that I gotta deal with, with my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley], my family. But and I'm not saying that Steve's mother didn't love him, that she didn't I mean 'cause I know his mother and she did love him. And Steve's a mama boy in, in whatever in that, in quotes and you know she loved this boy. And he told her that you know it'd be all right taking some time off and he'd go back, and she said well that's the way you want it fine, I'm just you know I love you, always come home. So I mean it, it was a shame because what he needed Steve was the one who needed the kick in the pants. Speaker 2: Now you think that, I mean in retrospect now, I mean do you know that him like being in car, he went to a mental hospital, right? Speaker 1: Yeah, oh but that Steve wasn't crazy, I mean that, what he was doing was taking what they used to call oh, what is it PCP, whatever that was. Speaker 2: That'll make you do that. Speaker 1: That'll make you I mean, I mean a lot of cats used to do I would hear that they would like taking their clothes off and running outside naked and stuff. He's running around so, I actually go to get Steve, his girlfriend calls me and I go to get him and pick him up. And I'm like, "Steve, what's going on man? I hear you riding, running through the, you know shopping center naked." He said, "I wasn't naked man I had a sheet. I can't help if the wind was blowing the sheet up." (Laughter) And I mean he's not taking this seriously at all. But that's what you know and then he began to the drugs thing began to I mean; he began to get deeper and deeper and deeper in drugs. And he couldn't go to the work at the post office; in fact he never went back to work at the post office after April Fool's Day 1980, 1979, was the last day that he worked at the post office. Or that he worked anywhere, he has never gone back to work, he lived in his mother's house. I have not been in touch with Steve for a long time now because they finally tore down the building where he lived, the projects. And I, I lost touch, I don't know where he is or how to, or how to find him at this point. Ray on the other hand who did very well was one of the successes in the, in the Brook Brothers when I went back to do, to look at these guys. Also had a tragic kind of ending, got hooked up in drugs lost his family or his family left him. And was last I heard back in Chicago [Illinois] and then back in St. Louis [Missouri] which is where his wife was from. His children, his daughter, actually graduated from Agnes Scott College [Decatur, Georgia] here and called me once. I hear that his children are doing quite well, and had been meaning to look him up through his children. 'Cause they apparently know where he is but it's very sad story. Speaker 2: He done all right but didn't (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, they you know and as I said, I, I, never, I don't judge them I don't but, there lots of lots of, lots of sad stories there that people who didn't you know whose foot slipped and who fell down and weren't able to get back up yeah. Story_ID: 274370 Speaker 1: We were talking about the summer that you made contact with Newsweek (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. So I'm at the Mr. Zee's [ph.], the grill man, cutting onions and crying and whatnot, and I go home and this advertising director has introduced to me to, to someone to the news editor of Newsweek magazine a man named Hal Bruno who later became political correspondent for ABC News. Bruno calls and offers me, actually Bruno, didn't do that. That, they well yes, he did, he offered me a job as the as the as summer intern and copy boy and messenger at the 1968 Democratic [National] Convention in Chicago [Illinois], for, for Newsweek. And the convention was held at the [Union] Stock Yards [Chicago, Illinois], at the, at the, excuse me not at the stockyards at the [International] Amphitheatre [Chicago, Illinois] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: Near the stockyards, 43rd [Street] and Halsted [Street] in Chicago. And what my job was to go there in the afternoons about one or two o'clock, make sure that our workspace was, was operating, and I loved it. And, and I would go there every, and I'm gone hang around these journalist, these national journalist now who worked for Newsweek magazine. And I'm seeing, I'm meeting national journalist from The New York Times from other, from the Chicago Tribune from Newsweek who I was working for and the, the headquarters was at the Con- what was then the Conrad Hilton Hotel now the Chicago Hilton and Towers [Hilton Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. And I remember being up in the suite when you know all hell broke loose and [Mayor Richard J.] Daley's and there were the riots in Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And people are covering this and I wanted to go out with the reporters, but they wouldn't let me 'cause I'm, I'm sixteen years old at the time. And but this is when I decided this is what I want to do, and so the next year, the next summer, so I do that. And that was only, that job was only also Hal Bruno when he called me to offer me this job, asked me what was I doing? I said I was a grill man at Mr. Vee's--Mr. Zee's he said well don't, he said I don't want you to quit that job 'cause I want you to understand you know the value of a job. You know 'cause the Democratic Convention didn't start for a couple of weeks. I quit Mr. Zee's the next day (laughter) I shouldn't you know, I'm, I'm never gone be cutting nobody's onions ever again. But so I had this, so I had the week, my, my internship was basically three weeks, the week before the convention, the week of the convention and the week after the convention stuff I had to do. But that three weeks, I didn't make a lot of money, but that changed my life, because then, I mean I had got the inkling of it at the [Chicago] Defender in the summer of '67 [1967] this is the previous summer. But summer of '68 [1968], I decided this is what I want to do; this is what I to be. Speaker 1: This is another footnote, of that Defender story too you told off camera but (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --later you met John [H.] Sengstacke right? Speaker 2: Yeah I made, I later met John Sengstacke, when I had met, when I had run a, I mean won an award. We were at an award ceremony, I won an award as a, I was a Newsweek correspondent then, and Mr. Sengstacke come, comes up to me, congratulates me and says you know the problem is you know good talented young journalist like yourself, black journalist like yourself we can't get you know any of them to come for the black press. You all wanna work for Newsweek and Time and Chicago Sun-Times and Chicago, and I reminded him that, that summer after that summer after my More Encouragement summer in '67 [1967], that summer that summer that I worked at Mr. Zee's. I actually went to the paper and tried to get them to give me a job, they wouldn't I asked Mr. Sengstacke could I even come and just hang out. I was so smitten hanging out at the paper, and he wouldn't give me a job. He didn't remember though that he had not given me a job, and I didn't, I, I, he didn't remember me, I didn't rub it in. I did (laughter) remind him about it, but it, it's ironic that, that I you know I would've given anything to have gone to work for the Chicago Defender. Story_ID: 274371 Speaker 1: Tell us about Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] now. Was Harvard what you expected or after going to (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: --St. George's School [Middletown, Rhode Island]? Speaker 2: No, no. What I expected when I got to Harvard, it was in some respects and some respects not. I graduated from St. George's, went to Harvard, my freshman year, I had two white roommates, one of whom, and neither of whom I'm in close touch with. But both of whom became very good friends, one had was a guy named John Hartnet [ph.] who he was from Webster Groves, Missouri. And he had been the senior prefect, the president of the student body when I was one of the senior prefects, when we were seniors at St. George's School together. And he got into Harvard, I got into Harvard, we both decided we didn't know anybody at Harvard, let's be roommates. He had a friend from Indianapolis [Indiana] named Peter Rusthoven who had gotten into Harvard, and so we, we all invited Peter to become our roommate, so the three of us were freshmen roommates. Peter became White House counsel for [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan which is a very interesting how our paths crossed. And I became a White House correspondent for Newsweek magazine covering Ronald Reagan. He, Peter was a very conservative Republican, is a very conservative Republican, working for the Reagan White House of course that's what he would be. And nice guy and we used to tease him all the time, but Peter used to always talk about how when we were freshmen was about, he had always said, he had worked his, his summer internship that changed his life. He had worked for the senator from Indiana [Richard Lugar], I don't remember him. Speaker 1: Not Bayh. Speaker 2: Not Birch Bayh, the, I'll remember him in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A Republican too? Speaker 2: Yeah, Republican senator and he said that he was going to be by the time, I'll remember it. By the time that he said he was going to be the senator, a senator from that was his aim to be a senator from the State of Indiana. Actually no, I'm sorry, he had been the mayor of Indianapolis and then he became a senator and--I tell you, I have these senior moments now they'll, but I'll, I'll think of it in a minute. And he said, "You know things are gonna be so much better for people like you," he made this statement once. "It's gonna be so much better for people like you when people like me get into power." And I let it roll off my back, didn't, I didn't take it personally, I knew Peter, I knew he had a good heart, meant well. But I had a roommate, I mean I had a guy who become my roommate next year, who's a friend of mine from the Fort Green projects of Brooklyn [New York, New York]. Black guy and we became very close and we roomed together for the remaining three years, and he said this to me and his name was Elliott Fennell, this guy from Brooklyn. Peter Rusthoven says this, when things get I mean when people like me get into power, it's gonna be better for people like you. And (laughter) Elliott said to Peter, "When the revolution comes, I got a bullet with your name on it. Because people like you are part of the problem, we don't need you to make it better for people like us. We need you to get out of the way and let us have the same opportunities." And Peter, he was so taken aback because he really meant well, but that sort of patronizing kind of attitude did not go over well you know, and, in, we're freshmen now at Harvard, it's 1969. And Peter was just you know. Speaker 1: So this is the kind of rare, you don't, you never hear this in the black community. You hear someone say when I get in power (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: First of all you never hear that-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Not let alone what I'm gonna do, what, what I'm gonna do, but when I get in power (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: It was taken--this young man Peter Rusthoven-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Took it for granted that one day he would be part of the power structure (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: He knew it. Speaker 2: And he knew it, and, and in fact it became true. Of course he hasn't become, he never became a, a, United States senator, he's a very prominent lawyer in, in Indianapolis now. Have, having left you know the, the White House [Washington, D.C.], the Reagan White House as a, as a counsel, so he's done quite well. And he is in the power structure, but he you know as, as Elliott rightly corrected him, we didn't need him (laughter) to make things better for us. That was, I mean that's so that's freshman year. Story_ID: 274372 Speaker 1: The other than that happened is my class, the book I'm writing now which is a sequel to the book 'Brothers[: Black and Poor - A True Story of Courage and Survival,' Sylvester Monroe and Peter Goldman] natural sequel and if my editors at, at Random House ever should see this or hear this, they'll get a chuckle, 'cause I'm only about four years late with this book. But the book is called 'The Class of '73,' which is my class at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and what it's about is, my class--the class the class that entered Harvard in the fall of 1969, was the first class picked after the assassination of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], it had the largest class of black students before or since. And that was true of many universities, Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Ivy League universities and other schools around the country. Because after the King assassination, riots whatnot, then people did, then decided to decided that, that for, for the right reason or for the wrong reason, but that we would help we would integrate these schools and bring more African Americans to these schools. What the story, what the book is about really is a couple of things, one of them is the subtitle is the price, 'The Class of '73: The Price of Success.' And it's about the human price that African Americans like myself, like roommate Elliott Fennell, my roommate Cornel West, my roommate James Brown, who is an anchor for Fox football, they were all my roommates at Harvard. Is the human price we have paid for this so-called success that we are deemed to have, have, to have achieved and, and enjoy. In my case, the price has been what I call the constant dull pain of cultural isolation. And what I mean by that is when I went away to St. George's School [Middletown, Rhode Island] I was one of six black students in the school of 205 boys. All the rest of them white, all the teachers white. When I started to work as a correspondent for Newsweek magazine, right out of Harvard as a twenty-one year old, at twenty-one years old, I was one of six black correspondents in the world at Newsweek magazine. At Time magazine, the same when I left Newsweek and went to Time the same thing. Now it's no, it wasn't a problem on a day-to-day basis, I mean, I'm, I mean you remember through that period many of us who had that experience talked about being bi- bicultural and bilingual in, in a cultural sense. I was quite, I was as comfortable you know covering [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan as I was interviewing Jeff Fort, you know. The former head of the Black P. Stone Nation, but the thing was where I really worked though; in my work setting I was isolated culturally, all the time. At one point and, and when I worked for Time magazine, I spent sixteen years at Newsweek and then I went to Time in Los Angeles [California]. And all of the Time, Inc. magazines are on one or were in one building, they still are in one building. Time, Life, Fortune, Entertainment Weekly, Sports Illustrated, whatnot, and there are about two hundred people who worked at all of these. And at one time, I was the only African American above the level of receptionist or secretary at any of those magazines in, in the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] bureau, in the Los Angeles bureau. And I was at a party once and one of my colleagues or actually the party was at my house, and I invited some of my colleagues from Time both of them were white at the time. And some of my friend, African American friends and some of my Latino friends and other friends, and as my friends would come in you know, we'd slap five or do a soul shake and embrace and I was at my house and very relaxed for one thing. But I'm meeting these friends and one of my friends from, from one of my colleagues from Newsweek, I mean from Time said to me, "Vest [HistoryMaker Sylvester Monroe], I've never seen you like this," and I said "Like what?" He said, "Well you're so relaxed and, I mean no, you're always relaxed 'cause you're a pretty laid back guy." And he says, and then it's as if a light bulb went off in his head, and he said to me, "You know I never realized how culturally isolated you are at Time magazine." And I'd never really thought about it that way, but he saw, I mean seeing me interact in my home with other African Americans where he almost never saw me with other African Americans at Time magazine and though and, and sort of speaking that sort of body language and that cultural language he, it just shocked him. And that's when I got the idea for this book, because I don't, done the book, I'd already done the book about what it was like to, for my friends who were left behind in 'Brothers.' What it was left, when we, when I went away to school, what happened to them. Story_ID: 274373 Speaker 1: Then I thought you know what about those of us who did go away what did it do to us? And what and what legacy do we have? So there's that part, the cultural isolation. For Cornel West, what is it? Cornel is one of the premier intellectuals I think in the country today. But he's had these battles at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. He's now left Harvard and gone to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] fighting with Lawrence Summers the president who said, who, who said that you know sort of Cornel's out doing rap videos (laughter) hip hop videos and that being a public intellectual this whole debate about public intellectuals versus true intellectuals. A hollow debate I think really because you're an intellectual I mean what, why can't you? I mean what it is that Cornel's is bicultural and bilingual. He can, he's as comfortable you know speaking to, to members of the Nation of Islam or hip hop rap artists as he is talking, you know, [Johann Wolfgang von] Goethe and [Immanuel] Kant and, and whatnot in, in the halls of academia. And yet there are people who believe that you can't that the two can't work together, so there's, there's sort of the price of success for, for a person like Cornel West. For James Brown, I got invited on the set of the Fox football to visit him out in Lo- Los Angeles [California]. Terry Bradshaw says to me when I, says to James when he comes, James, and he's joking, I mean clearly he's joking. But there's a edge to it, he said, "James why is it you only bring black people to visit the set here?" And I what, I, what I wanted to say was you would want him to bring some black people up here, 'cause I don't, James was the only black person on that set. You know behind the camera, in front of the camera, except for the person in the green room who was serving drinks. And so you know James had confided to me any number of times I mean he had felt this isolation as well. And it's, and it's not unique to us, I mean from that climate, I mean it, it many successful African Americans in mainstream America here have had to deal with that, in whatever walk of life. And so but on the, but the flip side of that is, what this period is, what this water, what this point in history marks is a watershed. Because we begin to see this huge expansion, there's been a study growth of the black middle class. People have been going to black, people have been going to Harvard since 1865, I wrote my senior thesis about a history of black students in the Ivy League. But (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or even before then. Speaker 1: And even before that, I mean well, the first black graduate of Harvard was this guy Richard [Theodore] Greener in 1865 [sic. started in 1865, graduated in 1870]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: There's some people that attended before (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --but had not graduated. Speaker 2: Poor Martin Delany was blackballed. Speaker 1: Absolutely, and so you have a number of people who have done this, so this is not a big deal. But now we have this influx I mean it, the numbers are larger and, and there's a critical mass. And what it's doing is feeding the growth of the black middle class, and one of the things that I know--when I first got to Harvard, one of the things that bothered me was how people thought because I came from the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois], because I came from the projects, that gave me what I call in, in this book 'The Class of '73[: The Price of Success' Sylvester Monroe] this forthcoming book. What I call a black badge of courage. Somehow I was blacker, I was authentic black, and, and there would be the phrase, I mean I have a friend who works and lives right here in Atlanta [Georgia], I'm the goddaughter, I mean godfather of his daughter. But he was from Princeton, New Jersey. His parents were quite educated, very well educated, comes from a very well educated African American family. And somehow and nobody was pointing to him particularly but people like him, people would say on the campus would say oh, he's a bourgie Negro, you know these bourgeois. And that always bothered me, even as a freshman as a, you know an eighteen year-old freshman at Harvard. I thought something's crazy about this. You knew he's as black as I am and I think one of the things, if there's any legacy when I'm doing this 'Class of '73' book if there's any legacy is that our generation I think began to help redefine what it means to be African American in this country. That you don't have to be, I mean being African American does not mean being poor or black or oppressed or from a housing project. It means you can be successful, you can be what Harold Logan my friend from Princeton is, senior vice president at Manheim Auctions here. We're talking Cox Enterprises [Inc., Atlanta, Georgia]. And you still be, he's African, he's as African American as the, as some guy from the projects over here. And I think we have helped and one of the reasons we need to do that, I think is because this thing that's been going on a long time where black kids don't wanna excel, particularly black boys don't wanna excel in school because it means that they're acting white. And I think though we never put it in those terms, that's what was going on sort of when, when really smart black kids at Harvard University had this great opportunity at this great institution and they're saying, "Well ain't really black, bourgeois," you know. And, and I always, I always thought that was crazy and resented it, and, and I think now that you know as part of our, my role people like us I mean to show the way. Not to just talk it but to say you know I can say just because I mean yeah maybe I have that black badge of courage of having gotten out of the Robert Taylor Homes and made it to Harvard. But that doesn't make me more black than somebody from Princeton, whose, whose father and father before that graduated from college. So that, that was one of the things that I took mostly, I mean my freshman year at Harvard that, that struck me that was, that I didn't expect. 'Cause I expected to be there with the best and brightest, and I come there and I find you know this kind of nonsense going on. Story_ID: 274374 Speaker 1: --Does give you a distinction that you said the black badge of courage of having coming out of that situation of the peop- people didn't have to come out. But you were fortunate to have op- opportunity to come out, somebody saw and gave you the bridge to do something different, you know that fit your skills and talents. Speaker 2: What it did for me and what I've always been appreciative of is that it, it help me to see the world to a, through a, through a really interesting prism. Not a unique prism, but and less, and much less u- it was never unique but much less so to, today than, than then. But it helped me to be able to look at the world through two different windows. I mean I see the world as a kid, as the, as the son of Mississippi sharecroppers, educated in inner city Chicago Public Schools [Chicago, Illinois] and in one of the most prestigious up-scale New England boarding schools [St. George's School, Middletown, Rhode Island] in the country. And one of the premiere universities in this country, now what does that do for me? It allows me to actually look at the world through these different prisms and to help--and what I've done in my, in my whole career as a journalist, what has driven me, what I wanted to do is to get people from different places to recognize that there are different ways of looking at the world. And they're legitimate for, from where you stand that you don't have to agree with it, you don't have to embrace it, just acknowledge that--because I'm that the view from the gallery at the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois] is different and may cause me to act in a different way than the view from Troy, New York. Or one of the bedroom communities of New York City [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Or even Peter Rusthoven's (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or even Peter Rusthoven-- Speaker 1: Or-- Speaker 2: Exactly or Peter or the way that Peter Rusthoven saw the world. We both had, I mean Peter Rusthoven and Elliott Fennell both wanted to help improve the lot of African Americans in this country. I have no doubt that Peter was sincere in wanting to see black people do better, but from where he stood, where he looked, the way that he would do it was completely different from the way Elliott Fennell from Fort Greene projects from Brooklyn [New York, New York] would do it. Speaker 1: I just wonder, I heard, I used to hear the rhetoric in those days' people we used to talk about I was part of black student organizations and people would talk about coming revolution. I just wonder how serious they really were, you know I used to question people would get upset, but you know time is, is Malcolm [X] said time will tell, and it has (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think, I think that in those days when I was a freshman and you know and, those are the days of Gil Scott-Heron you know 'The Revolution Will Not Be Televised' (laughter) and so on and so forth, so forth. I think intellectually, most of us realize as we were using that word that we were not talking about an American Revolution with guns or a French Revolution (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or armed-- Speaker 2: Or armed, but, but what we were talking about was a revolution of the mind, a revolution of way of getting an entire nation to look at who we are and who we can become and how we're gonna become that. Some I think took it, I mean there were though, you know we also talking about the era of the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party]. You know who were in fact talking about if necessary, we're, I mean the era of Malcolm X who had talked by any means necessary, we're gonna achieve this. And you know either by the ballot or the bullet, so we, there were some who believed that, that might come, I, I as a, as a young man, as a young adult believed that it were possible but I had great fears from my reading of history. And I actually simply being grounded in reality always had great fears about it, if we ever got to an armed confrontation between African Americans and the government or whatever entity you're talking about that would not, that was not a desirable thing (laughter) to have happen. Speaker 1: I think you had a vantage point from which to see on this side of the, I mean what peop- people would actually be able be up against (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely, and I mean there were many, who, who sort of glorified it as some of glorified sort of thing. But I think the value in it as I said was a way of thinking, and, and getting people to, to stop looking at themselves so much as victims. And take control you know self-determination take control of their own lives. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And that went, for that you know we're talking about my college years, those were the most val- I mean I learned to think in a completely different way. You know, in a, in a quote, revolutionary kind of way, and I, and I think that was as valuable or in some ways more valuable than anything I learned in a book, in my years at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. Story_ID: 274375 Speaker 1: You were at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at a time there were some pretty good heads walking around there (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 1: You know, black and white but especially in the black community, yeah you had like Cornel West running around there-- Speaker 2: One of my roommates. Speaker 1: You had you know the, as I recall the black student organization had, Ewart Guinier? Speaker 2: Ewart Guinier (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Ewart Guinier. Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ewart Guinier became I took a class from Professor Guinier, [HistoryMaker] Lani Guinier's, Lani Guinier's father, people more people may be familiar with Lani. Lani Guinier who had been, I mean Ewart Guinier who had been you know in the old, with A, I mean A, he had rubbed elbows and friends with A. Philip Randolph you know. The Proland Car Park, I mean the Pullman Car porters that whole labor, black labor organization [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters], black labor history. These, these, there people like that are, I mean Martin [L.] Kilson [Jr.] who not many--the interesting thing not many of us black students really liked Martin Kilson at that, at that time. But Martin actually grew I think over the years. Speaker 1: It seems to be the anti-black studies, black studies professor. Speaker 2: That's right; I mean in fact it was this war between Guinier I mean the two tenured black professors at Harvard during my time there were Ewart Guinier who's chairman of the African, African American studies department [Department of Afro-American Studies; Department of African and African American Studies] and Martin Kilson who was professor of government. Those were the only two black tenured professors at Harvard at the time. Other people that were there guy named David [L.] Evans (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right. Speaker 2: Engineer, David Evans was a director of, was admissions director at Harvard, but much more than that. I mean an intellectual giant really on that campus. [HistoryMaker] S. Allen Counter, a biologist when I got out I did stories, I did a story, he and, he and David Evans went to [Dutch] Suriname [Republic of Suriname], Dutch what was formerly Dutch Guiana discovered this tr- discovered this tribe, African tribe called the Nduykas. As a cub reporter at Newsweek, I did a story. But there were people like that, African Americans like that, huge minds I mean at Harvard at the time. So there were, so as I said when I learned, and I never took a class from any of them except Ewart Guinier. But I learned from them and just being with them that was the promise that was I expected from Harvard. And that was, I mean and that part I got to be with some of the best African Americans and other minds in the country, if not the world. Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember, I'll think of him, he was admission's director I think from Louisiana, but he was like Mr. (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) [John S.] Harwell. Speaker 1: No, this black man wore a Harvard blazer all the time and a bow tie. Speaker 2: Oh [HistoryMaker] Archie [C.] Epps [III]. Speaker 1: Archie Epps, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, Archie (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We interviewed him a couple-- Speaker 2: Epps is the senior, Archie Epps was, was the dean of Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the time, Orlando Patterson from Jamaica he was senior tutor in Leverett House where I lived. It was these great, I mean great minds--the interesting thing was we had this sort of class thing going on. Epps, Kilson, Orlando Patterson were not generally well-thought-of by the black students at that school at that time. Because they were thought to be, to have for lack of a better word, sold out to the establishment and were not authentically black enough that, that sort of silly phrase. The interesting thing is I got older and got to know these, these men; I did disagree with some of their positions, but came to have great respect for them. Speaker 1: Right I think were you there when they carried Archie Epps out into the yard in his chair, I think he was sitting in his chair (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --and took him right on out, he was talking all the while (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah right, well he took, I was actually there because it was a building takeover, I mean my freshman year we, you know doing building takeovers and we lob- and we also took this old white woman who refused to leave. We just picked her chair up and took her out (laughter). Story_ID: 274376 Speaker 1: I wouldn't trade 'em, I mean they were tough. Not everybody made it through, because not everybody could deal with some of the contradictions and there were lots of contradictions that were going on. For instance, one of them, I think a debate that we wouldn't really have today. But the fact that all of the top level people, including Ewart Guinier who, who the black students were close to, were married to white women. [HistoryMaker] Archie [C.] Epps [III], Ewart Guinier, Orlando Patterson all married to white women and that was a kind of--for my roommate, Elliott Fennell, from Brooklyn [New York, New York], that was the kind of thing that he just couldn't--I mean he's like and, and it really, it really caused Elliott some problems particularly with Guinier, because Ewart Guinier, Professor Guinier was such a passionate scholar and professor. And we'd sit in his classes and sometimes we wouldn't even do the lesson 'cause he'd start talking I mean about the days with, with A. Philip Randolph and so and so forth. And we just loved these stories and he'd get really riled up and he's talking about you know how white people could do this and how they can do that and be banging on the table, none of us knew he was married to a white woman, and then we discovered this. And for me, I mean I've always been on the position that, marry who you want to marry, be in love with who you want to be in love with, I mean even back then. You know both my wives were African American, have been African American. I may yet have another who knows? But it was not that big a deal for me. For Elliott, this was a profound kind of betrayal that he could not reconcile. He said how could this man who has done all these wonderful things to move the race, to, to help black people, and we know his heart is in the right place. And he's banging on the table and he's talking about how awful white people are, and he goes home to a white wife. And I was, and I was like, "Well Elliott, you know he loves who he loves." Elliott could never quite (hand motion). Speaker 2: There is a pattern there when you look at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in those days even now [HistoryMaker] Henry Louis ["Skip"] Gates [Jr.] has a white wife (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right. Speaker 2: [Kwame] Anthony Appiah has a white boy, boyfriend. Speaker 1: Right, right (laughter). Speaker 2: [William] Julius Wilson's married to a white woman. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: You know it's the department is pretty much is, is similar. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It's, I think it's a cultural orientation that, I mean it seems as though there's, there's a pattern (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: That-- Speaker 1: And all those people-- Speaker 2: May you know, well I don't know what you know-- Speaker 1: All those people that you have talked about I have the highest respect for them, and I really, and it's not an issue for me. And yet I think what is the issue it's that the issue is not and one that some people don't like to talk about. But I think one of the things as people were coming as people were making their bones and education and other fields, even in journalism, if you look. Mark Whitaker, the first African American editor of a major news magazine who is half white, half black, his, his father is, his mother is black, his father is white, is married to a white woman. And these, some of this helps with I have always, this has been an argument, it's not based on anything. But that some of getting ahead in that world is that you are now a part of that world in a way, and it creates a comfort level. This is not scientific, this is something I have debated and talked about with people with many years. But I believe that there is more to it, I mean it's not the reason for their success, but it helps create a comfort level for everybody involved. Or it has over the years; I think that's less true today than, than before. But it's always been there, and we've had some heated, we used to have some really heated debates at Harvard about that, and I and in years since. But, but as I say my roommate Elliott who had a nervous breakdown and who actually in our senior year, brilliant guy, brilliant guy. And that was one of the things that I noticed at, when he was unraveling was these contradictions that he couldn't sort of deal with about you know people. 'Cause look we have to think about it, we're eighteen, nineteen, twenty, by the time about to be twenty-one year old, young adults. And we're in this environment which is sometimes hostile, Harvard University, sometimes not, I mean, we're comfortable there physically. But in some culturally and some other ways uncomfortable, there or let's put it this way. There was a dis- always a disquiet that some of us felt about being on that campus. I wrote a story called, when I was a junior it's actually I think one of the most, I, I look at it now maybe every five years or so. And I realized that it's one of the most important things that I ever written, it was called 'Guest in a Strange House.' And it was about; it was Guest, 'Guest in a Strange House: My Life as a Student at Harvard,'--'As a Black Student at Harvard' [sic. 'Guest in a Strange House: A Black at Harvard,' Sylvester Monroe]. And what I talked about was just these, these contradictions and trying to make sense of the world. You know here I am at the premiere university in the, in the country, certainly and perhaps in the world. I'm a black kid, I'm looking for, I mean I grew up without my father [Kittrel Peoples]. I'm looking for black role models, particularly black male role models, all the black role models, not all. Most of the black male role models at the school are married to white women, we're in the time when we talking black, I'm black and I'm proud, black is beautiful and so on and so forth. And for some of us, that create, I mean, that, some of us couldn't get past that like Elliott. We, we never could quite, right, what is it, what does it mean? I mean does that mean for us to really make it we have to have a white wife, we have to do, I mean what is it? And so there was all of these little things that we were kind of wrestling with at the time. Story_ID: 274377 Speaker 1: --Helped with the, to a, to a definition of what people considered making it at the time these, these brothers were coming along. And probably was a cultural materialistic advantage to, to do that, I mean you know if you, if an anthropologist were to look at it or something. There is a pattern, I mean it's, it's disturbing in light of the other rhetoric, and, and thinking you know that was going on, but you think well you know, you can see on some level why they would have done that being insolated (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'll tell you a funny story that that I never told publically, when I was at St. George's School [Middletown, Rhode Island] like I told you there was some, some professors there, white guys who really I became close to over the years. And who really helped me a lot. One of them when I graduated and I was freshman at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], one of them had a daughter who was a year behind me in school. Who came to visit Harvard when I was a freshman she was a prospective student, and it turned out the girl had a little bit of crush on me. Pretty girl, white girl, she comes and she wants to go, I mean she's walking around and she doesn't stay with me, she's staying with some girls. But she knows me from St. George's, and so I'm supposed to show her around, it's Saturday afternoon, spring, no it's not the spring, I'm sorry, it's in the fall, but a beautiful Indian summer day. And she wants to go into Harvard Square, no problem, we walking down the street and she, and I don't think she meant anything by it, I mean she knows me, she's comfortable with me, I think she had a little crush. She grabs my hand, so she's holding my hand, it made me so uncomfortable because I'm walking down the street with this white girl, and, and I'm not uncomfortable about what white people think, I don't really care. What I'm uncomfortable about is at that place, at that time, the black women on the campus were as adamant as any, as any; I mean black women continue to have this thing (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were more adamant than most-- Speaker 2: But, but more adamant than most and also I'm afraid that I'm gonna run into somebody from AFRO [Association of African and Afro-American Students], because we've had these, we've been talking about backsliding, which was called quote, unquote, backsliding, dating white women is backsliding. So this girl, who I am really quite fond of, I mean not as a girlfriend, but I'm, as a person, as a human being. And she's a good friend, and so we're holding hands, and I'm walking down the street and, and unconsciously, subconsciously I am as far away from her. And there's lots of people on the street and she stops and she says, "Is there something wrong?" and I say, "No, no, no," I denied it, I denied it. And we're walking on and now who do I look and I mean what I dreaded was to run into anybody that I know. And I look up and I see who is it but the president of AFRO, he's coming my way, and I thought I'm ruined, I'm absolutely ruined. And I can't let this girl's hand go, but then as we get closer, I look and he's with a white girl and the absurdity of it, I mean I think and the funny thing was after I saw that, and he sort of doesn't look at me and I kind of don't look at him. And we go right past and we don't acknowledge and, and I thought how absurd. I've gone through all this angst because I don't want, and I'm thinking, wait a minute. Story_ID: 274378 Speaker 1: And so this is sort of some of what led me to write this piece ['Guest in a Strange House: A Black at Harvard,' Sylvester Monroe], I mean it took me years to write it. That happened when I was a freshman, but this other thing, and then we have this 'Talking Loud [and Saying Nothing]' and this whole thing about black badges of courage and bourgie, bourgeois Negroes. And yet we have people who are at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], black people who are at Harvard who aren't applying themselves, who aren't taking advantage of this opportunity of being at this university. And, and when I, and when I saw this as one of my term-time jobs I got a job tutoring students at something called the Bureau of Study Counsel. So students who, who were having trouble writing, at Harvard. Now they're at Harvard, and so and I'm running into these people both--and the interesting thing is, we're talking Harvard, I'm running into people black and white who have to write a paper longer than two pages who panic. And so my job then was to help, to tutor people, tutor students younger than me and some in my own grade level who are having trouble writing. So I, I just, I'm talking to my friend Elliott [Fennell], my roommate, and I'm saying you know there's something just not right here you know. We get at, I think what broke the straw, that broke the camel's back was people would being, black people would say, give me something relevant they would go and they were trying to jive these professors at Harvard. Who would allow themselves to be jived, because they go, they say well give me something relevant to my experience. You know all of this stuff we talking about here, this is not relevant to my experience. I'm African American, blah, blah, blah, and what they were doing was getting around really doing the kind, applying themselves and, and meeting the same standards as everybody else. And the university, some professors, some well-meaning liberal, white professors were complicit this because they were saying well yeah, I understand. You're from the projects, da da da, hey you're at Harvard University now, you got to play in the big leagues. Because you from the university, I mean 'cause you from the projects that's no excuse for you not to, to be able to write well, to read and understand what you write, to, to meet all the standards that everybody else is meeting. The best example was there was this class, biology class and this guy pulls this thing, he does, he flunks the exam, goes to the professor. And he says I'm going to this professor and I'm gonna tell him you know give me something, what is this you know give me something relevant to my experience. Problem was the major part of the test was on sickle cell anemia, how much more relevant can you get to the African American experience? And I just thought this is absurd, this is absurd. And so I wrote this story saying you know all this talking loud shouting "I'm black, I'm proud." "Black is beautiful," and yet you are hiding behind this black thing here at Harvard University. Wherever, however you got here, they plucked you from this school, from the street corner here, if you couldn't read when you got here, doesn't matter. You at Harvard University now, you have the, the opportunity to fix that, and you have the obligation to fix it. I took a lot of heat, a lot of heat from my peers for quote, unquote airing our dirty laundry in public. I said well somebody's got to air it, but as I said to you before, I look at that piece that I wrote. And it's one of the most important pieces I think I ever written in my life, because it stands, it stands the test of time. It made Martin [L.] Kilson [Jr.] respect me and later, in later life we became friends, even though at that ti- at that time, Martin didn't have a lot of respect for us. Because he's saying you know why you all walking about slapping hands, slapping five and talking like you do and all that jive stuff. But when I wrote that, he began to see me in a different light, and as we got to know each other, I began to see him in a different light. Story_ID: 274379 Speaker 1: How did you see Kil- [Martin L.] Kilson [Jr.], what his (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well-- Speaker 1: --real concern and-- Speaker 2: --his real concern was in fact the concern that I had, that black students had come there were and opposing and wanna change this institution, this three hundred and some odd year old institution, and make it black. Well, we're fooling ourselves. The institution had been there, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] had been there and been Harvard. Now granted, it needed to change and bend and the culture needed to change some, but we weren't gonna turn, make Harvard University, I mean and, and what I ultimately said was you know it took, at some point if Harvard is oppressing you and this, and, and it becomes that oppressive, nobody made you come there. And there are plenty other places you can go get an education, I said we have an obligation to, to make, to bring some change, but we are not going to turn Harvard into you know another, you know historically black college [HBCU]. Certainly not, not the handful of us and nor should we. Speaker 1: Well what's interesting in those days historically black colleges are very conservative (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were, even more conservative. Speaker 1: More, more conservative than a lot of the white institutions and-- Speaker 2: And tougher. Speaker 1: I think maybe the public institutions were probably the ones that bent the most I guest to pressure from people. But when, when you I just wonder if, was there anything in the, in the black consciousness movement in those days that you thought was, was a value that has endured beyond (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh there was a great of value, the, the value in it was that in some places, in some ways it was a hostile environment. And by banding together, now many whites at the university took great offense and thought that we, that our banding together was an anti-white statement or an anti-Harvard statement. It wasn't anti anything, what it was, was a statement that said we needed to, I mean we're in this environment where we've been dropped and, and told to sink or swim. And we needed each other and we needed to support each other, and, and the value that I took from it and many others, there were others. The value that I took up from it was learning how to do depend upon each other you know and so informally. And so what I did, and what Elliott [Fennell] did and some of us did, as we became upperclassmen, we realized that we had an obligation to reach back and to help any African American student at this campus who was having any kind of academic or any kind of other problem. And what they, what the, I mean you know taking over buildings and you know getting Harvard to divest from Gulf Oil [Corporation] and all of that, that was fun. But that wasn't going anywhere, really it didn't, it didn't change Harvard's policy on one thing, but learning to, learning to but it what it do for us was we learned that you know we have to--in at Harvard in the society as a whole, African Americans have to help African Americans. And that, that was, I mean and that you know that sounds very simple right now and, and sort of no-brainer, but that we could not be there you know and, and we could not have this thing where, I got here on my own. I worked hard, I got here on my own merits, I don't owe anybody anything. What it taught me and what it taught was that we all stand on other shoulders. And we have to allow others to stand on our shoulders you know, and, and so forth and so on, and that's the most valuable lesson I think I learned from the African American organizations there on, on school. It had nothing to do with, I mean I did fine St. George's School [Middletown, Rhode Island] prepared me in every way I needed in terms of academics. Where I needed the help and the preparation was, was socially and culturally and what does it mean that I'm, I mean what does it mean that I'm an African American student on this campus beyond myself? And that's what I; you know that's what I really got from AFRO [Association of African and Afro-American Students], and during those years. Story_ID: 274380 Speaker 1: Did you major in journalism? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: No, okay. Speaker 2: There's no journalism major at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I wanted to major in English but, because I always liked English. I like the way I figure writing, but to major in English at Harvard when the general exams come when you're a senior, it's 80 percent English literature. [Geoffrey] Chaucer, 'The Canterbury Tales,' 'Beowulf,' and while I read those and enjoyed them, that wasn't what I was interested in. What I was interested in was American literature and American history. So there was an, a major, an honors major called social studies and you had to apply to it. They let thirty-five students in a year. I applied and what you did was when you get in, you tailored a curriculum. My roommate Elliott Fennell the one who had, from, from Fort Greene in Brooklyn [New York, New York] was an economics major. I would've been economics major but I had a broader interest than just economics. I had this, this interest in American literature and American history. So I tailored this curriculum to study economics in American history and, and read literature. And so, and so my degree is social studies, Bachelor of Arts in social studies. Story_ID: 274381 Speaker 1: So you're majoring in social studies (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: You get, you had a chance, chance to kind of tailor your curriculum. Speaker 2: Yeah and, and so as I said in the, and I tell people and they always say, well social studies, what is that? And I tell them I say remember the, the movie 'Love Story'? Well the, the protagonist in that movie was a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] student and he majored in social studies which was that honors major. Speaker 1: Robert Redford was in it? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: Oh I know who you're talking about, he (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He has a daughter, Tatum O'Neal. Speaker 1: Yeah Ryan O'Neal. Speaker 2: Ryan O'Neal. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Was the. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: But yes so that's what I, what I majored in, and it comes it's comes to me it's been pretty valuable, I mean I don't miss not having going to journalism school. Speaker 1: But you know people were used to say, well or, well social studies I mean to be a journalist you have to have a grasp of American history. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You have to be, have the grasp of the American literature too (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right. Speaker 1: A general knowledge base-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: That is, you know that's broad enough to be able to draw frame of reference and understand what's going on around you. Speaker 2: And the economics really helped 'cause I had enough courses to actually be a, a almost had enough, not quite to be an economics major. And so that, that has been really invaluable to, to sort of 'cause over the years, and lots of things, business and, and just being able to know the nomenclature and to, and to know how to, to do, to look at a, you know a balance, to do a balance sheet. To read a, to read a annual report, just little skills like that have actually become very valuable. Speaker 1: Yeah they're not so small (laughter) you can't do it, a lot of people are very educated that can't do that, or don't it well. Speaker 2: Right. Story_ID: 274382 Speaker 1: So Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was, I wouldn't trade, it was, it was a difficult time as I said for some 'cause my roommate Elliott Fenell, brilliant guy though what we didn't understand then, I think Elliott was what you, what today we would call two things. One I think he was schizophrenic and I also think there was some depression involved, two things that we know about more about today than we did in 1972. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-three [1973]. Speaker 2: So it may not just have been an emotional (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no. Speaker 2: --burden. Speaker 1: No I think that there were some, some things going on. Speaker 2: How did he fare? Speaker 1: He, he, this happened in the senior year, it started to come on and I note began to note, and we were both writing senior thesis. My senior thesis 121 pages that I wrote in a week, though I had done the work but the act, on the history students in the Ivy League. His, he was an economics major, he did his thesis on black economic development, we both turned in, staying up all night for lots of nights. We both turned these theses in March 29, 1973, that's when they were due; we turned them in, spring vacation starts the next day. One of the things that happened is Orlando Patterson who is senior tutor in Leverett House was constantly on blacks students. And Elliott didn't like him personally and thought he was bad, well he told--there was a girl in our class who had a boyfriend. Boyfriend, they break up, breaks her heart and she goes to Orlando Patterson and ask if she could have permission to take the general exams later. Patterson takes the position, I guess that he should've taken, which is, hey, I don't wanna hear this, you take the exams when you're supposed to, you pass or you don't graduate. She comes to Elliott and me who are now, I mean we're seniors, she's a senior, but we're fairly respected among our classmates. Crying, "I can't take these exams, I just a basket case. Professor Patterson wouldn't let me do this da, da, da, I don't know what I'm gonna do." Elliott says, "Don't worry about it; we're gone go see Professor Patterson." I say to Elliott, I know 'cause lots of times we'd help, we, we'd helped all kinds of students with studying and tutoring and, but I'm saying Elliott, "So how--what are we gonna say to Mr. Patterson, Professor Patterson?" He says, "Don't worry, leave it to me." So I get on the, the bus, I mean we spring vacation, not the bus. I go to Chi home to Chicago [Illinois] to my home, he goes, and I think he's gone to Brooklyn [New York, New York], but before he goes to Brooklyn, he makes a stop at Professor Patterson's office. Now Elliott Fenel brown belt in jiu jitsu an opposing guy, big, thick guy, not, not very tall, he's only about; he's about 5'11", six feet, big guy. And he goes see Professor Patterson and he goes with a briefcase and he says to Professor Patterson, and I get this from Prof- I mean from him version from him and from Professor Patterson, who I both talk to later. And he says, "Professor Patterson you know this girl came to you, she asked you honestly I think why would you do that?" He, and he repeats, you know there's no excuses there can't be any excuses for black students. Black students have to tow the mark, do the same as all other students. So Elliott opens this now, remember Orlando Patterson is from the [Caribbean] Islands, I think he's from Jamaica, I could be wrong, it's one of the islands, but he's West Indian. And Elliott pulls out this doll and he's got a pin, and he's rocking like this in his chair and he saying, "You know professor, it's not right. It's just not right, this girl came to you for help, you deny her for help, deny her help." And Elliott's sticking the pin in that di- head of the doll; well this is making Professor Patterson very uncomfortable. Not because of voodoo, but just that he's got this loose cannon sitting in front of him, and he's sticking the doll and sticking the pin in the head of the doll. And he says, "You know you can be got, your hunky wife can be got, your half-breed baby can be got." At this point Patterson is about to freak out. Anyway Elliott puts the doll away, closes the briefcase and leaves. Patterson calls the police. Elliott gets to they, they don't, the police don't get him, he gets to New York [New York] and he's ha- I mean and clearly something's going, something's wrong. Because he gets there and I, I hear then his mother calls me and I hear that he's in Kings County Hospital [Center, New York, New York], mental hospital, the mental ward, and he's in a straitjacket. It has taken a number of policemen to subdue him and he's just, he's angry, he's just furious, he's furious at Patterson, he's furious at the world. Story_ID: 274383 Speaker 1: And so there's lots of things that were going on, but that story, he returns to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and in the fall. Finishes, gets his degree and goes to and he's already been, at that time, he's already been accepted at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor [Michigan] Ph.D. program in, in economics, or master's [degree] program that would lead to a Ph.D. He's a good ole kid though whose gone to [The] Hotchkiss School [Lakeville, Connecticut] much like me, which is one of those boarding schools. He's come to Harvard, he's from Brooklyn [New York, New York], never even learned to drive, not ventured out much and now he's going to Ann Arbor, Michigan in January. He lasted ten days. The weather was so, I mean for somebody you know we from the Midwest you know somebody who's used to that it doesn't get that cold n Brooklyn you know, doesn't have that much snow. And he, so he comes back and drops out of there and starts to live on his wits, I mean he starts to do, I mean he's a smart guy. And he's all kinds of scams, he calls me one day, I'm at Newsweek magazine by this time, as a correspondent. He calls me and says he wants me to find, I have access to information. He wants me to find people who die, young people who died before they were old enough to get a social security card. But that I can I get their birth certificates and their mother's names and their father's names? And he's creating these identities, you only get social security numbers you're getting credit cards and all kind. And I'm telling him "Elliott [Fennell], I don't wanna know, I don't wanna know what you're doing." But and, and so his behavior just gets more bizarre and more bizarre and more bizarre, and to cut to the chase. As I said, he's a brown belt in jiu jitsu, his brother who's a jazz musician a beau- I mean the first guy I'd ever, the person I ever heard amplify a cello. His name's Bernard Fennell he played with Mongo Santamaria, he played with a whole bunch of other people, brilliant musician. And they, Elliott's behavior, he has this girlfriend and she's pregnant with his child and he's gotten all this bizarre behavior, which was not like him. I have to tell you I mean he was a really a gentle soul, big guy but he was gentle soul. And he's had, got her in a headlock and so his brother and they loved it, there's only the two of them. His brother saying you gotta stop this, what, you acting crazy and his brother restrains him by grabbing him one of these jiu jitsu holds in the throat. Well when he does it, he does it a couple of times and the last time he did it, Elliott's vocal cords collapsed and he strangled on his vocal cords. So his brother, I mean that's send his brother into a, a funk and depression like you haven't I mean, and so his brother leaves the country. And goes and tours Europe and whatnot, Elliott, I hear about this and I'm just torn up because I loved this guy. I mean this guy, though I was streetwise and from the City of Chicago [Illinois], this guy Elliott, and he used to always kind of hold it on me. He'd say "Chicago is a nice city, but when you got New York [New York], what you need with Chicago?" (Laughter) And I used to tell him to counter, "Well, you know New York got the best and the worst of everything, if you lock off the extreme you got Chicago" (laughter) and we would fight back and forth that way. But I learned so much from this kid who was my age, but he was from New York and, and as I said as worldly as I was, streetwise, I just. I mean a kid from New York, from the Fort Greene projects [Brooklyn, New York, New York], anyway I miss him, and, and continue to miss him to this day. Story_ID: 274384 Speaker 1: Are there any teachers at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that really kind of stand out and do teachers there you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah you can, you can-- Speaker 1: --have strong relationships with students-- Speaker 2: No, I mean the guys who I really remember were the guys I mentioned Al Counter [HistoryMaker S. Allen Counter], never taught me but you know we got to be real good. David [L.] Evans, [Martin L.] Kilson [Jr.], [Ewart] Guinier. Kilson not so much while I was a student there, but afterwards, and people like that. There is, if I had one professor and actually he wasn't even my professor, my senior thesis was the history of black students in the Ivy League. And my senior thesis advisor was a guy oh Jesus, and I can't even remember his name now but he was, he, he I don't even know how I picked him. But he was gone all the time and he had to leave, so I actually finished my thesis by myself. But David Riesman the famous sociologist who is a professor at Harvard read my thesis and wrote me a ten-page critique of it that I cherish to this day. Because that man whose you know, one of the intellectual giants of the university, said that the work that I had done was really excellent and superior. And, and it's interesting in the four years there, that's, that is perhaps the, the height of my sort of intellectual or academic achievement. I mean not achievement but relationships with a, with a student (unclear). The teacher that I felt closest to is a teacher that I had as a freshman, her names Claudia [Mitchell]-Kernan, black woman, Dr. Claudia Kernan. She too- she taught a course in linguistics. Years later, she and her husband, Dr. Keith Kernan, are teaching at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and I'm doing a story on in a, a magazine piece that I did for the Los Angeles Times magazine on interracial marriage and dating ['Love in Black & White: The Last Racial Taboo' Sylvester Monroe]. And I remember that Dr. Kernan was married to this white guy, now I find out that she's at UCLA and I go back, and we strike up this. But she gave me an A in the course, in linguistics and I always remember, it's funny, it's the only, if you ask the names of my professors, it's the only one that I can remember at Harvard is Dr. Kernan. Speaker 1: Okay, all right so when you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, and Ewart Guinier, I'm sorry. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 274385 Speaker 1: --On the verge of graduation where, what did you plan to do? Speaker 2: I, Elliott [Fennell] had applied to was, had applied for this Ph.D. program, James Brown, my room, my other roommate, Cornel [West], Cornel actually was in the class behind me, '74 [1974]. But he, he graduated in '73 [1973] because he ran out of money, Cornel was gonna go on to, to grad school, divinity school. I was trying to think, what am I gonna do, so I applied to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and in their in a history prog- Ph.D. history program. And I applied to, to the [University of Chicago] Law School [Chicago, Illinois], and I get accepted in both. But in the meantime, after that internship that I had with Newsweek, the next year I get offered a summer internship in the summer for the summer of '69 [1969] which was, I mean excuse me the summer of '70 [1970], summer of '69 [1969], I'm sorry. Which is the year that I'm going to enter Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as a freshman and I'm offered a summer internship, but these are for college juniors. Hal Bruno offers me this internship, I'm terrified, I was like, whoa, I don't you know, so he says, "Okay." So he sends me to a friend of his, a guy name Al Weisman [Albert P. Weisman], who is vice president for, vice president of public relations for Foote, Cone and Belding [FCB] advertising agency in Chicago [Illinois]. And I take that summer, a summer internship, summer of my freshman year, summer before my freshman year actually at, at Harvard as an intern with this guy Al Weisman who I become very good friends with, very close, an aging Jewish guy and a young black kid from the projects, an odd couple if ever there was one. But this guy took an interest in me and taught me how to write copy. The next summer I do another internship at Foote, Cone and Belding, but this time I do it in the creative department 'cause they've learned that I have an interest in writing, that I can write, and I'm put on a creative team with Don Pegler and some other people. Don Pegler, name probably means nothing to you, but he's the guy, he's the art director who created the Raid bugs, the, Raid roach spray, this guy whose like, even then, I mean even then he's a famous, I mean I know who he is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where "They got me--." Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah Raid and they go "Raid!" Well anyway this guy is the art director who created that. So I'm put on this team and I do some stuff and before it's over, the summer-- Speaker 1: It's ironic, if you didn't meet him, I'm sure you met some roaches in Robert Taylor [Homes, Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Oh yeah (laughter) oh yeah there were some roaches in the Robert Taylor Homes. And they, they come to me and they say "Look [HistoryMaker] Sylvester [Monroe]; we'd like to make you an offer. We want you, we will hire you to be a create--." I mean to be a, a, the art director's or copywriter is what they were called to write copy for, for advertisements here. "We will pay your way, pay for your college expenses through Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], but you have to leave Harvard, and you'll work here and you'll go to school at night and we will pay you a salary." Now think about this, I am a freshman; well I just finished my freshman year at Harvard. I'm about to be a sophomore at, at Harvard. They offer me thirty-five thousand dollars a year salary, 1971, '70 [1970]. Speaker 1: That's a lot of money. Speaker 2: That's a lot of money, thirty-five thousand dollars a year, they're gonna pay for my entire college and I'm about to do it. Al Weisman hear (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To put it in perspective, six thousand dollars would've been a lot money for a college graduate-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --in 1970. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I mean teachers are making-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You know right out of college. Speaker 2: Right, right. So I'm saying, "Yeah, let's where do I sign?" Al Weisman is furious, the guy that I had Hal Bruno had sent met to that I worked for, he says, "Damn it, they don't care about you." Because they're recruiting, they're trying, this time they trying to integrate these places and da, da, da, da, da. He says, "You're getting out here," he calls Hal Bruno, he says, "I want him outta here." He said, "They don't care about you. They want you to leave Harvard and go to Roosevelt University." I'm saying, "Don't be so hasty, they're gone pay me thirty-five thousand dollars a year to be, to be on the creative team here." He said, "No, no." So he calls Bruno, Bruno says, "Okay, okay, so you ready to come to work now?" So that after my sophomore year, the year, the summer after my sophomore year. I, I now am more mature, I take the internship with Newsweek in Chicago as a, as a reporter, summer intern. I do that summer; I do the next summer back in Chicago as a summer intern, the summer after my junior year. And that's when those internships are, were for, they're for college juniors, finish that and do, do fairly well, and go back to Harvard. And I become a campus correspondent at Harvard, reporting to the Boston [Massachusetts] bureau chief of Newsweek. Story_ID: 274386 Speaker 1: Just before I graduate from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], they offer me a full-time job as a, as a full correspondent in the Boston [Massachusetts] bureau of Newsweek. And that's how I got to Newsweek magazine. Speaker 2: Okay, well now okay, so now, so this is full-time job? Speaker 1: Full-time job and I'm the youngest correspondent they've ever hired, youngest full correspondent they've ever hired. I'm (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is 1973? Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973]. Speaker 2: Seventy-three [1973], so you're-- Speaker 1: I'm twenty-one years old, I haven't turned twenty-two yet. Speaker 2: Do you have any second thoughts, or maybe I should go to grad school or (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I thought about it and what they, I was gonna go to, I was gonna go to journalism school, because I had told after that, I mean, I remember, now remember I'd been accepted at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], history program, and at the [University of Chicago] Law School [Chicago, Illinois]. So I defer, I write to them and I say I'm gone take a year off, halfway through that first year, I realize this is what, I don't want to be a lawyer. And somebody says to me, "Law school is fine but he said if you don't want to be a lawyer, you have, you don't want to be in law school. Unless you want to be a lawyer, there's no, I mean you really don't what to be there." And the history thing was my interest in history but now I've had these two summer internships and so I defer. I get halfway through, I mean I get through that first year and it's time to, to let them know something. And I realized, I'm doing what I wanna do for the rest of my life, and I write nice letters to the University of Chicago and tell them I'm not coming and, and that's the beginning of my professional career. Speaker 2: Now what, what did you work on first, what, what important story did you? Speaker 1: At first it was a long haul you know I had had some success. In those days, Newsweek didn't have the kind of--and Time didn't have the bylines like they have now. Where either at the top of the story--what would happen is write a story and when you did something very well and that they wanted to reward it to you, they you'd be somebody quoted and they would say, you know "As Larry Crowe told Newsweek's [HistoryMaker] Sylvester Monroe." And that would be in the text of the story and that would be the way they would give you credit. Well I had worked for almost a year and never got one of those, and so what I did, I mean and you would file stories, and you'd see a piece. And so I'd go home to my wife, to my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] and anybody, my friends see this paragraph right here, this came from me, I did this, this was me. But I hadn't had a big hit yet, and then the [HistoryMaker] Kenneth [Carlton] Edelin, 'cause I started in Boston not Chicago [Illinois] when I, when I started full-time in the Boston bureau. Then there's the abortion, Kenneth Edelin, the man who, abortion trial in 1974, early 1974. And this was the first case that tested Roe v. Wade [1973], the, the abortion ruling. And I got to cover that trial, and I did this really good job and they put, and what they used to have something where they showcase the best stories or the biggest stories of the week in something called Top of the Week. And they take my picture with Kenneth Edelin and the publisher, I mean the editor writes and you know our own, our Sylvester Monroe was there and interviewed Kenneth Edelin and we have this story. And, and that, and that was my first big story. Story_ID: 274387 Speaker 1: The next big story was I covered school desegregation in Boston [Massachusetts], 1974, '75 [1975] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wow. That was-that was a pretty wild story-- Speaker 1: Yeah, and that was the one where I kind of made my bones as a, I mean I'm still a young reporter, but I was start, starting to get you know the respect of editors in New York [New York] and people would say you know, "This kid can do it." Speaker 2: I recall as at South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah. Speaker 2: Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Was the, was the battleground. Speaker 1: Yeah South Boston and Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], Dorchester. I rode a school bus masqueraded as a student and rode a school bus from Roxbury to South Boston High School [Excel High School, Boston, Massachusetts]. And wrote the story about what it was like riding 'cause nobody hadn't--what it was like to be a kid, a black kid riding from Roxbury to South Boston. Being bused to South Boston High School with the ugliness that was going on at that time. Speaker 2: How was it? Speaker 1: It was ugly, I mean it was, it was really ugly I, I went, I found the staging area, it was against the law for us to be, or against the court order for reporters to be in the schools. And I had no intentions of going into the school, I had, I, I meant, simply found out the staging area where the buses were picking up the kids in Roxbury, the black kids in Roxbury and I was there interviewing kids. About what it was like what, whether they were their fears and their hopes and whatnot about being bused to South Boston. And it got time to get on the buses, and I thought hmm, you know the kids knew who I was and so I asked this little girl if I could carry her books. And these little giddy girls and so I took her books and I got on the bus, nobody stopped me. And I'm, and the buses go through South Boston and these people are coming out and they're making monkeys, apes sounds. And they're pointing their hands like this short guns at the--and the kids are real troopers. As we going through these neighborhoods and the kids are saying you know Mr. Bus Driver, the bus driver is white. And they going, "Mr. Bus Driver whatever happens to us happens to you, just, you bet just get us there" and dotty, dotty, da. And, and I'm picking up this chatter and describing what's going on outside the bus and what's the route looks like. And it's great stuff from a journalistic point of view. Then we get to the school, and, and it suddenly dawns upon me that I've got to get off this bus, I thought 'cause the bus one bus would pull up right in front of the school. It's roped off, they have guards there, there's state troopers, there's local police and the kids come off and you go right through, off the bus. Through the metal detectors into the school, I gotta get off this bus. And I'm thinking oh, my God, I mean, I'm a reporter my colleagues are on either side of this line, I mean other reporters from other. Nobody gives me away, I come off this thing like with, with my, with a book trying to cover my face, nobody says, "There's Vest [HistoryMaker Sylvester Monroe], what's he doing out there?" And I go in the school, get in school and now I'm just trying to not get caught by the authorities. 'Cause I'm not supposed, I'm a reporter, I'm not supposed to be in this school. I'm walking around, somebody grabs me, turns me around and they got me, except that he's a little too fast. He says, "Hey, are you, what are you doing? Are you an aid?" And I go (nodding head) and he says, "Permanent or transitional?" And I go, "Transitional!" He says, "Oh, that's why you don't have a badge. Go in the, in the office and get a badge." So I go in the office and I'm standing in this line and there's like a print-out and they're checking people off. And they putting these little stickum badges on, so I see what they're writing on it. So I just gra- before I get up there, I grab a badge and I put my name, my real name and I put transitional. Put it on, go back out into the hallway, now I'm trying to find somewhere, I need to take notes, because I haven't been able to take notes. And I wanted, I go in the bathroom there's police in the bathroom, I go, everywhere I turn there's police and I can't get. So I'm walking, I try, I said I need to get out of this building, I get caught again, same thing happens. This person grabs me, "Who are you? Turn around." He sees the- "Oh you're an aid. We understand there's a reporter in the building." I said, "Oh really?" I said, "You know well I, why don't I look down here, you look down there?" and finally I get to go in the bathroom. I take some notes and I get out of the building, but now I realize, I've got this great story in my head, and in the notebook. All of these great scenes, and I realize that I'm on foot in South Boston and I'm a black man on foot in South Boston at this time. Luckily one of my colleagues from, from Newsweek had seen me go in the building waited, takes me back to my car and I take my car, and I'm driving, I'm feeling really good. Sun shining I'm driving through South Boston down Broadway to get back to the office. All of a sudden I stopped and it's, I'm hearing rocks, I think it's hailing, it's not hailing and I, and I look. And the people are screaming, "Get the Nigger, get the nigger. Kill the nigger. Get the nigger." And they're throwing rocks at this car, and I'm stopped at the light, and there's a car in front of me and a car behind me. And the car in front of me won't, the lights changed, but the car won't move, and so I was able to back up a little bit. There's an alley, I mean they broke the windows in the car and I'm able to drive down this alley wrong way, and I got out. But I was thinking Jesus, how lucky I was, because the day before, which was the, the second, the day before school started. And people were getting really riled up, there was this Haitian guy [Jean-Louis Andre Yvon] who had come to Boston and he had been stopped by people. He didn't know where he was or know anything, and they beat him half to death in South Boston. Speaker 2: Okay, wow, yeah, I, I understand. I spent on, spent like two weeks of summer in Dorchester (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: --in seventy-two [1972]. Speaker 1: That was about the time-- Story_ID: 274388 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Sylvester Monroe, S-Y-L-V-E-S-T-E-R, M-O-N-R-O-E. Speaker 1: And sir what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: August 5th, 1951, Leland, Mississippi. Speaker 1: And what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: Currently I'm senior editor at 'Marketplace' radio in Los Angeles, California, but I have been a print newspaper and magazine journalist all my life. Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is December 1st, 2012. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in downtown Los Angeles at the Frank Stanton Studios [Los Angeles, California] where 'Marketplace' is produced. Story_ID: 274389 Speaker 1: We left off in 2005 correct? Speaker 2: Wow, yeah. Speaker 1: And we, we had you up to the time when you started with Newsweek magazine. And can, can we kind of just recap how you got to Newsweek magazine and what your first year as a full-time employee was like? Speaker 2: Well as I said I spent my first twenty-one years of my life sort of taking advantage of opportunities that presented itself being a child of the '60s [1960s]. That presented themselves and you know getting the best education that I can get on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois]. Going through outreach programs called Better, one called A Better Chance Inc. [ABC] that started in 1963, that got me to St. George's School [Middletown, Rhode Island] and to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And through that I was in the right place at the right time, met some people and became a Newsweek correspondent, straight out of Harvard in 1973. I started in the Boston [Massachusetts] bureau of Newsweek in June 1973 about, excuse me in July of 1973, not quite a month after I graduated. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, yeah we interviewed Sam Yette [HistoryMaker Samuel Yette] a long time ago who was the first black (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --correspondent with Newsweek and he talked about the way things were when he started there. Were there any other black-- Speaker 2: When I started at Newsweek, and this was the golden, what's now looked back upon as the golden age of the news magazines. I mean if you, having a news magazine correspondent job then was tantamount to, I mean you could, if you walked around and said you worked for Newsweek or Time it's like being royalty. I was one of six or seven, I, I lose count but there certainly were no more than that black correspondents at Newsweek at the time. The irony is, and I was hired by two--Osborn Elliott, the late great Osborn Elliott was the editor of Newsweek at the time. And man named Rod Gander was the chief correspondent and these guys took the lead in integrating that magazine. They brought in Sam, as you mentioned Sam Yette, was the first black correspondent, John A. Williams had worked for Newsweek the author of you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'The Man Who Cried I Am.' Speaker 2: 'The Man Who Cried I Am.' Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: And his son, Dennis Williams who was in the same class as I was at Harvard but he was at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] became a writer at Newsweek at that time. Don A. Johnson from Chicago [Illinois] who used to work at WBBM Chicago was one of the earliest black correspondents. Vern Smith [HistoryMaker Vernon Smith] who was for many years the Atlanta [Georgia] bureau chief, John [L.] Dotson [Jr.] who was the first black news editor at, and first black bureau chief at Newsweek. First in Detroit [Michigan] and then in Los Angeles [California], here. So I was part of that, that group of you know really talented dynamic African American journalists to, to break the, you know color barrier at Newsweek. I remember my, what Peter Goldman said, not Peter Goldman (laughter) another mentor of mine. Peter Goldman was the chief political cover writer at the time and had written a Newsweek cover story in 1967 called 'The Negro in America: What Must Be Done?'. And that cover story sort of set the tone at the time for and, and positioned Newsweek to kind of own the, the race story in America. The coverage of black people in America, and, and Newsweek made a conscious decision that they were gonna, that that was gonna be theirs. And as I said with, with people like Peter Goldman and Oz Elliott and John Dotson and Vern Smith and they were able to take the lead on that. I remember Rod Gander, the chief of correspondents telling me when I retired, he said, "[HistoryMaker] Sylvester [Monroe] you know the best thing we can do for you is to show you this country. The best thing you can do for us is to learn it." And for my you know for that sixteen years, first, almost sixteen years that I spent at Newsweek that's what I did. Crisscrossing the country working on stories, not just about race, but political stories, social stories all kinds of stories about you know what makes this country this country-- Story_ID: 274390 Speaker 1: And what was interesting for me was that one of the reasons I wanted to be a journalist, was that I wanted to bring people together who were different. And the reason for that was as I, as we talked in our, in the first segment of our interview, I am the product of dirt poor Mississippi sharecroppers who came up you know looking for the promise land in Chicago [Illinois] from Mississippi, and so I grew up you know dirt poor. Grew up in the largest public housing project in Chicago [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois], but went to the best schools that you could go to in this country anywhere in the world. St. George's School, Newport, Rhode Island [sic. Middletown, Rhode Island], Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] later Stanford [University, Stanford, California] and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was through A Better Chance [ABC] and-- Speaker 1: Well I got to, yes; I got to go to St. George's School through A Better Chance. And so I saw, I met a long this way all kinds of people who's so different than me. And yet I could relate, I saw the world through these two different windows, I could relate to both sides. I mean I was as comfortable with gang members as I was--I eventually became a White House [Washington, D.C.] correspondent for Newsweek. And it was always my part of my, I saw as my mission as my role as a journalist to get these people to understand each other. You didn't have to like each other but if you listen to each other and talk to each other and got to, and sort of put yourself in each other's place, then you could see and better understand each other and learn to get along. So that was--and so I did this in stories that I did across the country. The culmination of that of my years at Newsweek first in Boston [Massachusetts] as I said, then I went to Chicago as a correspondent. I became, I went back to Boston in 1983 after covering Harold Washington's election as mayor in Chicago, was the first big political story that I ever covered. And I got promoted to Boston bureau chief. The next big story even before I could take over my duties as the Boston bureau chief, I got put on the [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L.] Jackson campaign in 1984, as the, as the Newsweek correspondent for, covering the 1984 Jackson campaign. Speaker 2: "Run, Run Jesse Run." Speaker 1: "Run Jesse Run." And, and that was not only historic, but it helped my career to blossom, because there were, there had never you know no black people a very few, let's put it, in journalism in general, mainstream journal, had ever covered a real national political campaign. And it catapulted not just me but a lot of folks like that, [HistoryMaker] George Curry with the Chicago Tribune at that time. Gerald Boyd at The New York Times. There were, there were a number of Kenneth Walker ABC News, [HistoryMaker] A'Lelia Bundles NBC News a number of us got the opportunity to play at that level you know in, in political coverage in mainstream journalism at that time. And that was huge for, for me and for a lot of us, because it said two things were going on. We were, we were covering history with Reverend Jackson's campaign and we were also a part of history, making history. Being out there as African American journalists on the front-line of that kind of political coverage. Story_ID: 274391 Speaker 1: In '73 [1973] when you started what was the biggest issue in the news in terms of the African American community, or the big, biggest story period? Speaker 2: At that time it would've been Watergate. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: The, the [President] Richard [Milhous] Nixon was taking a lot of heat at that time over the Watergate scandal, and it was huge, I mean [Bob] Woodward and [Carl] Bernstein were all the rage in journalism. Everybody wanted to be you know an investigative journalist. And I remember I had an editor who used to say, "What is all of this hubbub about investigative journalism?" He said, "All journalism is investigative" (laughter). You know you're, you're asking questions, you're finding out things. But yeah I remember that, the second big, or I, I wouldn't put them in any particular order, but as I recall that was the big story. Another big story at that time was the energy crisis. There were gas lines in '73 [1973] '74 [1974], we talking '73 [1973] '74 [1974] '75 [1975]. I was in the Boston [Massachusetts] bureau the gas lines all over the country gas shortages whatnot, and people and we're going through a you know a really tough time. It was the political turmoil (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The heating oil is, is a big (unclear) in the Northeast-- Speaker 2: Home heating oil in Boston, number two, number two what is it called, number two heating oil. And this thing, I mean people could hardly afford to keep their homes, because the price of oil just shot up. And there was this whole big deal about energy independence and dotty, dot, dot da, and so forth. So that was a big story, another big story at that time, which, which I got, which was perhaps the, as a Newsweek corr- a young Newsweek correspondent, first big story I ever covered. Was the [HistoryMaker] Kenneth [Carlton] Edelin abortion trial, that, that set the stage for Roe v. Wade [1973] in the [U.S.] Supreme Court. And it is the current law of the land in terms of you know the legality of abortion. And Kenneth Edelin was a black doctor who was sued for manslaughter in Boston at that time. And I got the opportunity to cover that story and to interview Dr. Edelin. Speaker 1: Now I never realized that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Kenneth, Kenneth Edelin okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And what, what kind of give us, how, what, what happened? Speaker 2: Well he, he performed an abortion after the, let's see the second, after the first trimester and the question was whether he had committed mans- he was charged with manslaughter. And this case eventually went to the Supreme Court. Kenneth Edelin, don't know what happened to him, he sort of dropped out of, he was, he was the center of this case, this little known case. It's one of the, it, it I would equate it to the case [Briggs v. Elliot, 1952] of the South Carolina, who the guys whose names I can't remember now. But the case did eventually became the, the what do you call it, the 1964 Brown versus the Board of Education case [sic. Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]. There were smaller cases in various places and the one I'm particularly remember was in South Carolina that led to the big decision. Well the Kenneth Edelin case was a small case that led to what we now know as Roe v. Wade that is the law of the land on, on abortion. Speaker 1: Now was he a Boston doctor? Speaker 2: He was Boston doctor, yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he was black, which was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The black aspect to Watergate to, to Frank [Wills] I can't remember his last name now the security guard. Speaker 2: Yes, I, I can't remember his name either, it's funny how (laughter)-- Speaker 1: His first name was Frank. Speaker 2: Yeah his name was Frank and he was a black security guard who, who actually sa- was the guy who investigated or first saw the evidence of the break-in. 'Cause it, what it was, Watergate started as was a burglary. These guys burgle, broke into the Watergate Hotel, I mean the Watergate Office Building [Watergate Complex] in, in Washington D.C. And from that, I mean a small burglary led to this huge you know political story and political debacle for the Nixon administration. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he just removed the tape off that was-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --on the door latch. Speaker 2: Yeah, they put, they put tape on the door latch so they could get back in and he thought who did this, and (laughter) it's funny how, how you know we sometimes at the right place at the wrong time or vice versa. Story_ID: 274392 Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Kenneth [Carlton] Edelin case? Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah that was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Energy crisis-- Speaker 2: Crisis-- Speaker 1: Watergate. Speaker 2: Those, those were all you know really big stories. And one of the things for me, for a kid you know I said, I'm twenty-one just turned twenty-two years old. I'm, I'm the youngest full correspondent that Newsweek has ever hired. And they hired me straight out of school, I learned on the job, luckily I always said that I was taught, I had two summer internships before I took the job. I--at Newsweek in Chicago [Illinois], in the Chicago bureau in the summer after my sophomore year and the summer after my junior year [at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]. And after I, after my senior year, I, I got hired as a full-time correspondent. In those summers I was taught by these, some of them rough old I mentioned ex-Chicago Daily News, Chicago's American [Chicago American] 'cause, that that was the newspaper back then. There were two, the Trib; there was the [Chicago] Tribune, Chicago American, Chicago Daily News, Chicago Sun-Times. And Chicago was then known as this great news town. Still is to some extent, but not you know in the way that it had been. And these guys had now worked for Newsweek. Don Holt who had worked for the Chicago, Chicago Daily News, Frank Maier, who had worked for the Chicago Daily News, Bernice Buresh who had worked for the Milwaukee Sentinel these were my, these sort of people who trained me. I never went to journalism school, I never had a writing course, I learned on the job, and I remember being terrified by some of these guys. They come in and they'd say--I had two kinds of editors, first was the guys that I was terrified of. I'd come in and I write my story, and in those days they'd call you into the office and they'd have you stand by the desk. And they'd have your copy and read it and say, "What is this?" I say, "That's my lede," they said, "Damn, this isn't a lede." You know and there be some expletive in it, and, "This isn't a lede. Get out of here, bring me a lede." And so I go and, and I fix it and get it right, and then there were the guys like Frank Maier I remember who was one of my mentors. He was the best, he was one of the most, he was a longtime legendary Chicago bureau chief, wrote a cover story for Newsweek called--on, on the first Mayor [Richard J.] Daley called ['Chicago's Daley:] How to Run a City.' Award, I mean just a beautiful piece of journalism, but very understated guy, and this guy when he would edit my copy, he would say, "So [HistoryMaker] Sylvester [Monroe], you know I read your story here, it's not, not bad, it's got some good stuff in it. But you know remember when you were telling me about this story before you went to go do it, how excited you were?" And I said, "Yeah." He said, "Why didn't you write it like that?" And that was the difference between this guys, these guys that I was terrified of and these guys that I wanted to do better to show them you know that I could do better. That their faith in me was not misplaced, and that's the way I learned to be a journalist. Story_ID: 274393 Speaker 1: I just noticed here that you are a Chicago [Illinois] [Newsweek] correspondent from '76 [1976] to '80 [1980] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventy [1970] to '83 [1983]. Speaker 1: To '83 [1983] actually okay, through, through the Harold Wa- Washington [Harold Washington]-- Speaker 2: Yeah and, as I said, Harold was my first big political story. Speaker 1: Your tenure there spanned death of Mayor [Richard J.] Daley-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and the election of Harold Washington. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: This is a period where-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --you know Chicago pol- politics changed-- Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: --you know. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Though they went back (laughter) when they, they were really were changed at that point. Speaker 2: It was a very exciting time and, and being you know a product of Chicago, I mean I, I grew up in Chicago. I mean though I was born in Mississippi, my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley], I, we got to Chicago I was less than a year old. So as far as I knew Chicago's was my home. And we grew up in what was they redistrict what was the old second congressional district. Actually it was Second Ward and I forget the number of the district but it was (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) First District yeah. Speaker 2: First District, it was Congressman [William L.] Dawson's district, the legendary black congressman from Chicago. And I remember the precinct captains and I remember them you know people bringing a turkey to our house before Thanksgiving. And I remember me saying to my mother, "You know Ma, those people are so nice they brought us a turkey." Not knowing that the turkey was the price of our vote (laughter) at that time, that they were getting it real cheap. And I remember having this love hate relationship with Mayor Daley, because I grew up understanding that Chicago was the city that worked. And even as a kid I knew that it what it meant by worked on a certain level was that it was this machine that things worked as political machine. That and you could get, you could go to your alderman and you could get little things done and whatnot. I had no idea that it didn't quite work the same in the black communities as it did in up in other parts of the city. So interestingly as I grow up and become a reporter and watching all this, you know a product of the Chicago Public Schools. I went to John B. Drake public school, elementary school [John B. Drake Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] from and, and Douglas Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois], and then Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] for my first year, before going away to St. George's [School, Middletown, Rhode Island]. And remembering that those schools were 99.9 percent black and poor and yet being able to, to get through though, having the caliber of teachers. Almost all of my teachers were African Americans with very few exceptions, but I just remember them knowing today as I know what a teacher, a difference a teacher can make. I was able to go from Wendell Phillips, from, from Drake, Douglas, Wendell Phillips, to St. George's School, one of the elite prep schools in the world. And do really well without a bridge, which said that you know for all of the talk that people you know, for all of the meaning sort of talk about you know how bad the Chicago Public Schools were, are, may still be. Those, the Chicago Public Schools did something right, because there were a number of us who were very well educated, thanks to the dedicated teachers that were there. So that in against that backdrop you know now I'm, I'm in Chicago, I'm a young reporter, and I'm watching politics. And I'm, I'm covering education, as matter of fact that's my first real beat. Story_ID: 274394 Speaker 1: And you know [Mayor Richard J.] Daley leaves and so when he dies, it, I always had a love-hate kind of relationship with him. I didn't look upon him as this particularly bad guy, but then I also, there was a part of him--I remember what, what he used to say, "Chicago [Illinois] is a great city, it's a city of neighborhoods, and everybody should stay in his neighborhood" (laughter). And, and but we all understood that, and the neighborhood, but downtown Chicago was the demilitarized zone sort of speak of. Where everybody could come and kind of get along, but I grew up in the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois]. And you know the only way that I could go across the, the Dan Ryan Expressway, the Robert Taylor Homes. And one of the things Daley made that statement shortly, about the time that the Robert Taylor Homes were opened, when he introduced the Robert Taylor Homes. And what he was trying to say was that you know we built, you know this project represents a great city he said. And you know, but what, what the Robert Taylor Homes were and, and the other projects along State Street were designed to do was to put poor black people in one place, and keep them there. And, and it had these natural boundaries on to, so the Robert Taylor Homes which stretched for two and a half miles along State Street, which divides Chicago east and west. They're four, what was it, twenty-eight, sixteen-story buildings that stretched for two and a half miles. At one time there twenty-seven thousand people who lived there all poor, all black, and so you had this concentration of poor black people. On the one side was the Dan Ryan Expressway you know, twelve lanes across at its widest, I mean as its widest point. To the north was the Illinois Institute of Technology, IIT [Chicago, Illinois], and that, it's funny, you know it sat there. None of, and then there are projects to the north of it, and projects sort of to the east of it. None of the, none of the sort of violence, ugliness whatever ever spilled over into IIT, because there would've been hell to pay. To the south was just more black ghetto and to the further, the further east you go, there's the lake. So you have these natural boundaries, you have this, these poor people in this you know isolated you know pocket well which actually turns out to be some of the best land. Some of the most choice land in the City of Chicago and that has now been re-gentrified it's amazing. Robert Taylor Homes are gone now; they're half million dollar condos and townhouses on that area. I recently back there to do a story for 'Marketplace' on the fiftieth anniversary of the opening of the Robert Taylor Homes, which closed some years ago. And to talk about the economic opportunities for people who grew up there and, and or their children, the former children, the children of former project residents. And not surprisingly the, the prospects for people today are not as good as they were. So as I said you know through this or I see all this. Story_ID: 274395 Speaker 1: Mayor [Richard J.] Daley dies and Harold Washington gets elected through this amazing coalition, gets elected the first African American mayor of Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: Did, did you--now you there as a journalist but did you and but you grew up in Chicago now you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I did. Speaker 2: You knew Chicago-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Did, did you think that it was actually possible for Harold Washington to win-- Speaker 1: I did not, I mean and, and all of the political wisdom leading up to that thing suggested that you know this, it wasn't gonna happen. And in fact, I'll tell you a little anecdote, I got my interview with the mayor-elect the day, the morning after. And I remember going into his office and he had a look on his face, I'll never forget, sort of that was like, oh (inaudible word), I'm the mayor (laughter) what am I gonna do now? Because I don't think anybody was really prepared for it. And one of the things I remember also though is that when it happened, I had seen other cities elect black mayors. And there was, I mean this is something that's really kind of intangible and you can't, but you could. And, and maybe it's my imagination, but you could detect a kind of pep in the step of black people as they walked down the street. Their heads were held up high, it was like you know wow, you know, we have arrived. I mean you know the man, T-H-E man is one of us. In and years later, many years later covering the election of [HistoryMaker] Barack Obama, I felt it again on a much larger scale in this country. Black people, first not believing or, or not or, or not, they wanted to believe, but they were afraid to believe that it could happen. And then it does happen and there was just this overwhelming sense of pride and self-respect actually. That, that I watched and you know as I said, it's, it's why as I look back on my career I think, I mean I never wanted to be anything other than a journalist. And one of the reasons is I got to be witness to history, and as I said sometimes be part of it so. Speaker 2: Okay now Harold Washington ran against the former mayor's son Richard M. Daley (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Speaker 2: And he ran against the first woman mayor of the City of Chicago, Jane Byrne. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: So and black people were not the majority in the-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --in the city. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 2: As they were in Cleveland [Ohio] or Detroit City [Michigan], so. Speaker 1: And the way he won was be, was because the Democratic machine, the Democratic Party got split. And there were people who were very upset with par, parts of that machine and so they formed this coalition with the African Americans. Which made this, which made the whole thing possible, and it happen, and the funny thing is it happened one time, one time. Although let's see now, Gene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] had I guess became, after Harold Washington died, Gene Sawyer became mayor for a while. And I think that was it, I don't think there's ever been another African American, and I remember. I think it was Eddie Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak] who was Harold Washington's nemesis in the [Chicago] City Council for many years. And I think it was Vrdolyak, I could be wrong, but somebody of that ilk who said you know that after you know after you know they got rid of, after Harold was gone that it would never, ever happen again. That they would never let this city fall in the hands of, and so far they've been right (laughter). Story_ID: 274396 Speaker 1: There's like a natural segue here 'cause I remember watching, well I was at Donnelly Hall [McCormick Place, Chicago, Illinois] when the mayor [Harold Washington] was elected. And Jesse, [HistoryMaker] Reverend Jesse [L.] Jackson who was not really a prominent part of the campaign (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no. Speaker 1: You know was on the stage-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Holding his hand up-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And soon after it's in '84 [1984] you were covering "Run Jesse Run." Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: First (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Black presidential candidate of any significance I guess in that. Speaker 1: Right, we and, and so from there as I said, I got the segue was I, I covered Harold Washington and was made the Boston [Massachusetts] bureau chief. But before I could take my position, Jesse Jackson's campaign sorted, it started with something called the Southern Crusade. Frank Watkins, white guy, good friend of Jesse Jackson's, Sr. and that family but a, a real strategist behind the scenes had helped penned something called the Southern strategy, and this was how the Democrats could win, coming up to the 1984 [Democratic National] Convention [San Francisco, California]. How the Democrats the strategy the Democrats needed to win the election, and so Reverend Ja- and it wasn't clear at first whether Reverend Jackson was really going to run for president, so from about April, they launched the Southern strategy in May, April, May of 1983. Now what that did, what that consisted of was Reverenced Jackson crisscrossing the South, going all over the South on a huge voter registration drive. His role in that, for whoever the, the nominee was going to be and it turned out to be Walter Mondale. Whoever it was going to be was, was to get out the black vote, but as it went, as, as the campaign, as it goes on and on and on, and I spent. I was on the road from for Newsweek from March, April I guess, April 1983 until August convention in San Francisco [California] in, in 1984 with Jesse Jackson. I had one week off, and that was Christmas week in 1983. Reverend Jackson announced his candidacy officially in October of 1983 in Washington D.C. Another sort of milestone of my career, I got shortly after Jesse Jackson announced, Reverend Jackson announced, I was on the plane with him. He left and it was Lamond Godwin one of his aides, me, a guy named Sam Riddle [Jr.] from Detroit [Michigan]. And they took a private plane and they went to Michigan, and Reverend said, "Come on [HistoryMaker Sylvester] Monroe, come ride with me." I was the only reporter with him for the first let's see we flew out of there for the first not quite twenty-four hours, I was the only reporter there. Story_ID: 274397 Speaker 1: So you're on a plane with [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I'm on this place, private plane with Jesse Jackson and you know, we and I remember him saying to me, he's turned; well he and Lamond Godwin are talking. And he says, "Lamond can you imagine? Homeboy you know here we am, here I am little black boy Reverend Jackson ain't got a pot to pee in, window to through it out of, running for president of the United States." And, and the sort of the, the gravity of it really sort of hit me then, I thought you know how far have I come from you know being this little kid on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois], to flying in a private jet? Having just left this big event in Washington D.C. with the first serious African American candidate for president of the United States. And it was, I mean it was heavy stuff you know that for anybody, but for you know and, and I thought you know Rod Gander was right, he said the best thing that I can do (laughter) for them was to learn this country. And, and that's what I did, and you know, and that's what I've done for the most of my, most of my career. Speaker 1: Okay, Jackson came in, was that the campaign where the Hymietown [reference to New York, New York] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, oh yeah so. Speaker 1: In seven, was that, that in '80 [1980]-- Speaker 2: That's 1984. Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984], okay. Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-four [1984], so (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah give us in, inside scoop on that one 'cause we, we-- Speaker 2: Well that so at first, one of the reasons that people like me and [HistoryMaker] George Curry and Kenneth Walker and Gerald Boyd got to cover, I think. Got to cover the 1984 Jackson campaign. Twofold, one was there was this feeling and in the same kind of way that black people got you know an opportunity to, to actually work for major newspapers when the riots broke out in the '60s [1960s]. Because they needed people, the newspapers needed people who they thought one, could go safely into these communities and cover and would have some access too. So there was that, I mean that people thought that we could, that this is a black campaign and that we might get some access that other people could not get. Which was true and not true, and I'll come back to that a little later. But so, we're, we're on this plane and things are going--and we're there but the other reason we were there is because I think a lot of people looked at it as a side, as an interesting kind of colorful sideshow. Nobody believed that Jesse Jackson was going to become president of the United States, and yet it was great news. It was big news, it was copy, because he was such a colorful and interesting character that it made for great news, and so we had to do it. The other reason which is a bit more macabre is the reason we were out there is that if no better way to put it: for a deathwatch. If something happened to him, that would've been a, a you know an even bigger story, and what news organization would not want to be there to cover that. Nobody ever said that in those words, but it was unspoken, it was, it was so you know, so that's how we, how we're there. Now, as it goes on Reverend Jackson being number one incredibly smart, two, just this great speaker. And we would go into these places and you know the country preacher as he used to describe, describe himself, would just bring the house down. And so what ha- his, his [National] Rainbow Coalition of progress- whites progressives, blacks, Jews, Latinos, labor and so forth, this, this was the co- and the interesting thing is that this is the coalition that elected [HistoryMaker] Barack Obama. But it started with Jesse Jackson saying that this, that there are more of us, meaning that coalition than there are of them of conservative white Republicans. Story_ID: 274398 Speaker 1: But the [1984 presidential] campaign starts to take off, and it's, it's really rolling, it's rolling. And all of a sudden, it comes to a screeching halt in New Hampshire because it comes to light that [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Jesse L.] Jackson had used this language referring to Jews as Hymie and to New York [New York] as Hymietown. Now it turns out that I have some insight on this having been on the campaign. He, he had in fact used the language, though he always denied, he said you know, "I have no recollection of ever having used that language." Like any politician you know, you're not gonna, I mean [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton, "I did not have sex with that young woman" (laughter), you know. So you know whose gonna stand in front of the cameras and come clean like that? So but his campaign is rolling, I mean and he's, he's now he's, he's in double digits percentage-wise. He is, and he won, I'm trying to think, what he won the [Washington] D.C. primary, he had won something in the South, I can't remember, but he had this momentum. And this story breaks, we were in Albany, New York and this story breaks in The Washington Post that says he's used this language. And we get to New Ha- and he tries to ignore it, I mean I have no recollection, and we get to New Hampshire, coming up on the New Hampshire primary. The story breaks in January, late, no it's in early January we're in Albany, New York the, the New Hampshire primary's February, the first week in February, 1984. And he, and it just won't go away, he's trying to ignore it and it won't go away and it won't go away, and, and he had been like this rock star. I mean he had been like the other Jesse Jackson, he would, I mean the other Jackson, Michael Jackson. He would go into a town and you know people would come out, and now some of them were never gonna vote for him. But some of them just wanted to hear this great man speak who could bring a crowd to tears and joy and back again. And it was wonderful I mean we, there are a group of us who used to, who said that we were gonna make a million dollars. We we're gonna take Reverend Jackson speeches and call it the great Jesse Jackson's greatest hits (laughter). 'Cause he had a number of these speeches you know, he'd talk about grandma's hands you know how she had hands that once picked cotton would pick cotton would now pick a president of the United States. And then he talked about you know un- the voters black voters being wasted. And he said, he says like little David, you can slay Goliath but your rocks you just, and you just voters is like rocks laying around, pick up you rocks, pick up your slingshot you know. And it was really inspiring stuff, and people would come who had never heard him before and this huge following, and a lot of them voted for him. Though as I said, a lot would not, anyway that comes to a screeching halt. Because the Jewish community now is up in arms and they're like what do you, I mean explain this language and (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I remember, I confess that I had never heard, I knew, I associated with, with Jewish people, the term Hymie; I never heard anybody else named that. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: But I, I did not associate it with a slur and never heard anybody use it like that (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: And the, the other thing is I think it was a black reporter, I think that a black reporter-- Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Milton Coleman. Speaker 2: --use of-- Speaker 1: Milton Coleman from The Washington Post. Speaker 2: Yeah and was this supposed be in a, a confidential conversation? Speaker 1: Yes, so what happened is that it comes out in The Washington Post, first of all, there's a story by a Washington Post reporter, white Washington Post reporter name Rick Atkinson. And the story was on Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition] and the finances of Operation PUSH 'cause at that time, there Jesse's now a serious candidate. And so he's being given serious scrutiny, his finances and so forth. And so this big Washington Post story runs, and way, buried in the story it says that you know Reverend Jackson had been known to use this language. Nobody paid any attention to it, that story came out maybe Tuesday or Wednesday of that week. That Saturday, The Washington Post runs an editorial, and in the editorial it calls attention to this language. We were in Albany, New York, I remember going to Reverend Jackson, I remember saying, "We need to talk. A story about Hymie, Hymietown is broken." And you know and I remember him saying, "Who did it?" And we said, "Well it's in The Washington Post. We think Milton Coleman did it." But Milton Coleman's name was not on the story, so Milton then gets asked about this and he says Jesse Jackson had used the language in a private conversation. While we were waiting at the Butler Aviation Terminal [Washington National Airport; Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, Washington, D.C.] to go from somewhere in Washington D.C., and he said that Gerald Boyd was sitting there, and he was there. And Reverend Jackson had said, "Well now you gotta go up to, we gotta go up to Hymietown and talk to the Hymies." That's what Milton swo- said he said. Story_ID: 274399 Speaker 1: In fact, here is what I know to have happened, in fact, [HistoryMaker] Milton Coleman never heard [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson use that language. On the campaign, [HistoryMaker] Jack White who was the Time magazine correspondent, it was Jack who had actually heard Reverend Jackson use this kind, this. And Jack had become angry with Reverend Jackson because Jack's girlfriend, this is really sort of in, but it is the true story. Jack got upset with Reverend Jackson because he had told him he had to leave the campaign, and (laughter) Reverend Jackson in the way he could be sometimes said, "What do you mean leave the campaign? This is historic, we, you know, we doing this, we doing that, we doing that. You can't leave now." So Jack gets mad 'cause he said, 'cause Reverend doesn't seem to show any kind of concern for his girlfriend who has been mugged in New York [New York]. And so Jack says he's going off the campaign, so he says you know I'm just sick and tired of, he's insensitive, dotta, dotta, dah and you know. And you know I'm a tell people he used this langu- that he called Jews, Hymie and New York Hymietown. And so Jack puts it in a, what's was then called at Time magazine, the confidential memo. This was a, and I later worked at Time magazine and knew what the confidential memo is. So the confidential memo is this thing where it's unwilled the facts and figures that never show up in a story. But you know, you don't quite know what to do with it and they get some discussion and they sort of put aside. So Jack, it was actually Jack White who heard, who says he heard Reverend Jackson use that language and put it in the confidential memo. It's there he had put it in the confidential memo in the fall of 1983. Time never did anything with it. During our campaign, during the campaign, we're standing outside of--it's me, Jack White, Kenneth Walker from ABC, Milton Coleman. We're standing outside, and Jack says and so Jack's telling this story about how upset he is with Reverend Jackson. Milton Colman says, "Really? I'm gone put that in the paper." Kenneth Walker says, "How you gone put it in the paper? You never heard it." Milton says, "I don't care, he said it." So Milton then, so Milton go, we all go off, we don't think anything of it, the story comes out, its buried as I said, it's buried in the bottom of the paper, you know bottom of the story. Nobody pays any attention, but there is a, at the bottom of that story it says Milton Coleman contributed to this story. Now Milton gets grilled about this, and he makes up this story, I believe, now he probably will, will deny this to this day. But I believe being grilled about this, Milton makes up this story about having this private conversation with Reverend Jackson at the Butler Aviation Terminal [Washington National Airport; Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport] in Washington D.C. About this you know, about this, about how he heard this language. Our, the rest of us say okay, here's our question, if this was a private off the record conversation, why would you publish it, even if he said it? And Milton's explanation was it was too important not to, we said but that, that doesn't fly. There are journalist rules and whatnot you know, and off the record conversation is an off the record conversation. Now the other thing that makes us think, some of us think that Milton never heard this is he said that Gerald Boyd was sitting at the table. Kenneth Walker and [HistoryMaker] George Curry and I wrote a book, never was published about this, and we grilled Gerald Boyd. Gerald Boyd who became the first black managing editor of The New York Times, great journalist, I mean just incredible reporter. Came from the St. Louis Post-Dispatch covered that campaign was out there with us every day. Gerald was the kind of reporter who, if Reverend Jackson had used that language at that table, it, it would have been in the next edition of The New York Times. Gerald said, "Yeah, I was sitting there the whole time, I never heard him say anything like that." So anyway, but that's, that's what I know about that thing, the bottom line is it kills Reverend Jackson's 1984 presidential campaign. Because the bottom line could, was that you could not be a hero and a bigot at the same time and the use of those words or the alleged use of those words painted him as a bigot. And from that, he, he his campaign really could not recover, yeah, which was very sad-- Story_ID: 274400 Speaker 1: Now do you think that [HistoryMaker] Reverend [Jesse L.] Jackson was a bigot actually? Speaker 2: I do not believe that Reverend Jackson was an anti-Sem- was a bigot or an anti-Semite. I think that he had a way of; he had a way of, of being close to, if he used the language and it is possible. I mean and, and I think that he had used the language, I never heard him personally use it myself. If he had, it was a way that he used to try to get close to reporters, to show that I'm sort of one of you, I mean lots of us would get phone calls at four o'clock in the morning. And you, we'd be on the campaign and, and there be a phone call he'd say, "Hey, it's your brother, it's your for real brother." We go Reverend Jackson, he say, "Yeah I need to talk." We--"Reverend, it's four o'clock in the morning" (laughter). He'd say, "I just had this idea pop in my head." And it was the way he endeared himself to, to some of us, and it wasn't just us. I mean some of the, I mean there was a, a reporter, a white woman named Jamie Gangel from New York, I mean from NBC who used to get the same kind of call, phone calls in the morning. But it's the way he worked his charm, the way he worked the press course, so I could see him offhandedly sort of using some language. But on the other hand, as he explained once, we brought him to Newsweek during the campaign to, and New- to the Newsweek headquarters in New York [New York]. To Top--to something called Top of the Week, which is a restaurant dining room up at the top of Newsweek. Katharine Graham who owned The Washington Post and Newsweek is there, the editors, the big, all the big chiefs, and they're--and Reverend Jackson comes in. And they ask him about Hymie and he's, I mean much to my chagrin, I thought he just dealing, I mean digging himself into a hole. But he explained, I believed him, but it just, he says, so you know half, these were his exact words. He goes, "Hymie, Stymie, Buckwheat; you know it's a term of endearment. I mean it's--there's nothing anti-Semitic about it." And then he starts to talk about, he says, "We grow up in Chicago [Illinois] you know and you know we live side by side, with, with Jews and Jews, we, we took over the areas, I mean we lived in areas which were once Jewish ghettos and they became black ghettos." And, and then he talked about you know what we in Chicago affectionately as children used to affectionately refer to as Jew Town. Which was the Maxwell Street shopping area [Maxwell Street Market, Chicago, Illinois] where you would go and you could barter and da, da. And where, while I could not believe the words that were coming out of his mouth at this high-level dinner and nor could the top editors or Mrs. Graham. But Reverend Jackson is going on and if you knew him and if you grew up in Chicago, then you would understand. But he was saying, "Hey, whew, what, Hymie, you know, Hymie, Stymie, Buckwheat, I mean we used to down to Jew Town, buy some suits, Jew 'em down." And I say, and I mean I'm thinking he's just, it, it's getting worse and worse as he says it, if you have no context, I mean not once. I mean I remember, I remember getting in trouble myself as a young kid, I was in eighth grade [at Douglas Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois]. And I just back from school and I remember we used to go down to Maxwell Street and we would buy Converse All Stars for six dollars a pair. This, I'm talking when I, I'm talking a kid in the 1960s. But we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now they cost normally eleven dollars. Speaker 2: Eleven dollar exactly, and but if you bought two pair, you might get them for six or seven dollars a pair. So I mean in these the original, Chuck Taylor Converse All Stars. So we go down and would you feel such pride or sense of accomplishment if you were able to cut that deal. Which we, with, with the, with not the slightest bit of anti-Semitism at all, would refer to as having Jewed somebody down. We didn't know any better that that was a derogatory kind of term, and I believe that is where, even though he is a grown man, and should know better, and know what kind of, and know the kind of hurt and, and that, that kind of slur connotes. It just as my eighth grade teacher, I got put in, put out of the class 'cause I so proudly, she said to me, "So [HistoryMaker] Sylvester [Monroe] where did you do this summer?" I said, "Well you know just this weekend, I went to Jew Town and I bought and I got two pair of Converse." And she said, "You went where?" And I said it again, and she said, "You get out of here," she said. "How would you like it if they came over here and called this Nigger Town?" And, and then I got it, but no one had ever, not my parents [Hattie Monroe Kelley and Kittrel Peoples], not anybody had ever explained to me that that was a derogatory remark. So anyway long winded explanation to say that you know, it's unfortunate, I don't think it's wrong because as I said you cannot be a hero and a bigot. And so the perception the use of that language pres- but I do not in my heart of hearts believe that Reverend Jackson is, is or was an anti-Semite. Story_ID: 274401 Speaker 1: Now did the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] take a position on it at all? Speaker 2: I don't remember the position, I just, I just remember that the first NABJ convention that I ever went to was in New Orleans [Louisiana] in 1983. And [HistoryMaker] Milton Coleman was on a panel, I was supposed to be a panel, because I was on the campaign. For some reason, and I don't remember why, I missed the panel, but they, and I don't remember whether they took an official position. But they did have a discussion about it. Speaker 1: Okay, okay all right. That's now that was, I know that was the, so the campaign after that point is kind of (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah the campaign after that point just kind fizzled-[HistoryMaker] Reverend [Jesse L.] Jackson did do, he did have a continued to have a major impact. And his speech in San Francisco [California] in 1984 in August 1984 was just in unbelievable. Some of the, as I said some of the luster off his own campaign had left, but he did what he was supposed to do, and he de- I mean the black folk delivered. Not only did they help elect Walter Mondale, I'm so, not elect Walter Mondale, but that they helped with his campaign. But they, they helped with the [U.S.] Senate and, and the congressional races, that was where the real impact was in 1984. And, and helped also to lay the groundwork. One of the other important things about the 1984 campaign is that Jesse Jackson helped to establish the, to get rid of the vote, the winner take all rules, the rules for dividing delegates. If these rules had stuck the way they were, [HistoryMaker] Barack Obama would never have been, would never gotten the Democratic Party nomination for president in, in 2008. I mean so there's lots of things that the Jackson cam- I mean people have said, you know people said I mean I've gone so far to say is Reverend Jackson irrelevant is does he does and Reverend Jackson will never be irrelevant. Because he is a part, I mean he accomplished some things that you know rogue that some people saw him to be that he have been. He pushed this country from A, point A to point B in a way that no one else could possibly have done at that time in history. Not Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], not Vernon Jer- [HistoryMaker] Vernon [E.] Jordan [Jr.], not any other black civil rights leader or political figure of that time. And so for that, you know with all his faults, I think he is certainly as I, from my position advantage point as a, you know as a witness to history as a reporter. That's crit- crucial and it pains me when I hear people sort of wanna dismiss him as this, as now this sort of caricature of himself. Because yeah he's made mistakes and name me a big name politician you know who hasn't (laughter). It's just that he and, you know people have wanted to throw out the baby with the bathwater. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah I was at a national training during that, the time of his political speech before the [1984] Democratic National Convention [San Francisco, California]. And black people from all over the country crowded into a room to watch it on TV. And everybody was enthralled, I mean to a person and so-- Speaker 2: No he did, I tell you, as I said, with all his faults; he did what no one else I think you know could have done at that time. And it and it has, and it the legacy is is and part of the legacy is Barack Obama. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Which he uncharacteristically made a (unclear) analogy and you know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right (laughter) he's his own worst enemy sometimes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: I mean he says things and does things that, that are not in his best interest, and which I was having a discussion the other day with somebody saying, so you know [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton made as egregious personal you know missteps in his own personal life that impacted his career. And yet Bill Clinton maybe the most popular politician in America today, say bar- you know barring Barack Obama. That nobody remembers, or if they do remember they sort of just look at it as aside. You look at the Jacksons, you look at [HistoryMaker] Jesse Jackson, Jr., who just resigned his from [U.S.] Congress, who also made some missteps. And you wonder okay how will history when you know, how will history really look at the Jacksons who are the closest thing to political royalty in this country on the level of like the Kennedys or even the Bushs or whatnot, who are, I think made a huge contribution to moving this country forward. But what will their legacy be, as a result of their own personal missteps? Speaker 1: The hazards of being glib on some level-- Speaker 2: Yes, yes. Story_ID: 274402 Speaker 1: So in '85 [1985], now you went to the Boston [Massachusetts], no you were at the Boston bureau (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: When, we just-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Eighty, I was, I was Boston bureau chief from '83 [1983] to '85 [1985], '85 [1985] I went to Washington [D.C.] bureau. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I became a national correspondent in Washington, and later, well and then which brings me to perhaps the kind of signature story of my career at Newsweek, which was 'Brothers.' 'Brothers' came about because I had talked about for years I had sort of talked about growing up in the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois] with these guys and so and so forth. And at that time, about the, the '85 [1985], '86 [1986], there was much talk about black males as an endangered species, quote unquote. I don't know where the phrase came from, but it got used a lot, and there all these stories about black men. And most of them you rarely heard from black men, there were people you know and one of them stuck out. CBS News' Bill Moyers for whom I had a lot respect, did a story on black men ['CBS Reports: The Vanishing Family - Crisis in Black America'] and he interviewed this young kid, young man. Who you couldn't have pick him out of central, better out of central casting, his name was Timothy McSeed. And he had fathered six or seven children out of wedlock; he was taking care of none of them. And Bill Moyers is interviewing him and going on, "Well so, you know, why do you have all these children?" And so what is, and so Timothy says, "I guess I have super sperm." And he says, "Who's gonna take care of these children?" He says, "Well I don't know, the state." And I'm looking there and I'm just cringing, 'cause I'm saying that's not black men, you know. That is some black men, but it's not all black. So we get this discussion at Newsweek and we decide, we wanna do a story about black men, some kind of story. And we're doing it doing, and one of my former bosses, in fact the man who I one of the people I worked for in the Boston bureau before I became a bureau chief, a guy named Tony Fuller. Who was another Chicago Daily News, former Chicago Daily News reporter. He said, "Vest [HistoryMaker Sylvester Monroe], what about those guys, you know those guys you talk about all the time grew up in the Robert Taylor Homes, do you think they will talk to you?" And I thought about, I mean, I it never crossed my mind to do that Newsweek would do a story about black men from the projects. Now occasionally we would do, I mean we had done some, I mean somebody get killed or something happened, and, and we get this sort of elevated to a national story. But this and my thinking 'cause as, as happy as I was to be and excited to be a Newsweek correspondent, that, I just sat, I, I was doing every now and then I might do a story about a small piece of black life. Or something that happened in the black community, but that was not Newsweek's bread and butter. And I remember a guy named Ed Kosner [Edward Kosner] who became the editor of, editor in chief of Newsweek after early on. After, after I was still a young correspondent there. And Ed, I remember Ed saying once that as long as he was, that as long he was the editor of Newsweek, the three kinds of stories would never appear in Newsweek. He said there will never be stories about the environment, about Native Americans or [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory. And I never understood (laughter) why I mean he had this thing for Dick Gregory just, it wasn't gonna happen. And then later nineteen--let's back up a little bit. Nineteen seventy-four [1974], the next big story I covered in Boston was school desegregation. And there were riots in Boston, it was the first riot I ever covered, and I read, rode a school bus masqueraded 'cause I was very young looking, I, I masqueraded as a student and rode a school bus from Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] to South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts]. Where they were bus, where they were integrating South Boston High School [Excel High School, Boston, Massachusetts], and they were bussing these kids, and it turned out to be a, a big story for me. Because I, I got this incredible story riding with these kids through South Boston where they were threatened and then I got into South Boston High School and, and wrote all this, and so they wanted to reward me. So I get this pic- my picture on the bus top of the week, big story, and they're talk, thinking about whether they gonna make this the cover story. And it, they did not, it should've been a cover story, but they did not put it on the cover. And I remember Ed saying, "You did a great story Vest. But you know we don't put black people on the cover because they don't sell," (laughter). And that always, I, that always resonated in the back of my head as I worked there. I said okay, I, I'm not the editor; I don't make these decisions, I'm happy to be a Newsweek correspondent. I got these frustrations and so forth, but I move on. Story_ID: 274403 Speaker 1: So we move to 'Brothers' and I'm thinking they're not gonna do this story. But Peter Goldman my mentor, one of my mentors at Newsweek and then editor of mine, because of Peter and Tony. Tony Fuller was at the time the national affairs editor and they pushed this and they pushed me to go and do this story. To go back to Chicago [Illinois] to the housing project [Robert Taylor Homes] I grew up and do a story about black men. I don't wanna do it, because I just felt one, they weren't gonna give it the space; two, it wasn't going to get the kind of treatment that I thought it deserve. But they kept pushing and so I made all these demands and thinking they would say no, and I said, "So if we gonna do this story, I need first of all I gonna need some resources and I'm gonna need some time. I, I can't do this story in a week." And they said, "How much time do you need?" And I say, "Well I gonna need month or so 'cause I gotta go back, I gotta find these guys. I gotta talk to them and you know I need some help, you know I need a photographer and maybe we should put together a team." Because there was a special, Peter Goldman was head of the special projects team. So I made all those demands and they said yes to every one of them, so then I had to (laughter) go do it (laughter). And so I go to Chicago and I go, now at by this time, this is 1986, and I am, this is 1986 and I am a White House [Washington, D.C.] correspondent for Newsweek. And so they send me back and I go and I find these guys and what, and the result, which we can talk about in a bit, is was 'Brothers.' Story_ID: 274404 Speaker 1: --So, the 'Brother[s]' story, so did you take this crew to Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: Yeah I so I took, so Vern Smith [HistoryMaker Vernon Smith], who I mentioned, [HistoryMaker] Monroe Anderson another who, who also had worked, had been an intern and later at that time came back to work at Newsweek was a correspondent. Terry Johnson who was from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] who was a writer in New York, so it was, the reporting team was me, Vern, Monroe and Terry Johnson and Jacques Chenet, the late Jacques Chenet. Good brother from Haiti took the pictures for 'Brothers,' so we all went out, and I went out and find these guys. I meant to talk to maybe four or five or six of these guys. When I get back and the word spreads that Vest [HistoryMaker Sylvester Monroe] is back and he's doing this story for Newsweek, and everybody wants to be in this, in this story. So it was hard to turn down pe- so we end up with eleven guys and I couldn't do them all, so I, we, I divided them up. First of all I took them all out to a place call, Army and Lou's on 75th Street [Chicago, Illinois], and we had this dinner. And they're really impressed 'cause here's this kid who was one of them once. I mean I grew up and these were my friends as a kid, and I hadn't been back and I grew up, and we take them to Army and Lou's. And I remember how impressed they were, it was no big deal, I mean so I take out eleven how many guys? Eleven of them, four reporters a photographer and I pick up the check. And they're all look, and the checks about four hundred dollars, which is not a big deal for Newsweek (laughter) at all in those days. And so finally I remembered these guys, I said, "Look, I can't interview you all and the ground rules were that I know a lot of stuff about you. And you know a lot of stuff about me, but nothing that is not in a formal interview will we use in this story. That's the first ground rule," I said, "second, is I'm not gonna do the interviews." And one of the people that interviewed Scott Hunk Johnson [ph.], who was my brother-in-law. Or had, I wasn't married to his sister anymore but he had been, he was my ex-wife's, mother of my children, he was her older brother, one of her older brothers. So Vern does that interview and we split them up and we spend, we do what Newsweek was really good at back then. Telling these stories, telling the story behind the story, and so you keep doing these interviews and you get people to, to become comfortable with you and relax. And they, they start to tell you things, and the story and the narrative comes together, and what Peter Goldman taught us how to do was then you get this non-fiction piece that reads like fiction, like narrative. And it's got this beautiful narrative thread in it. The hardest part was finding the voices of each of the guys because what we wanted to do with that story was let, which Newsweek had never done before, which was let these African Americans voices, young black male African Aver- American voices, by that time, we're all in our early thirties. I was thirty-three years old. And we wanted to let those voices come through and let Newsweek readers hear voices they had never heard before, unfiltered through you know a white prism. Now there were people at Newsweek who weren't exactly comfortable or happy with this, and I remember a guy named Evan Thomas, who, who went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] with me, he was in my class. And he became my boss, because he became the Washington [D.C.] bureau chief, and I remember him saying - 'Brothers' happened before he came - and then he came and he said, "Vest you know 'Brothers' was a good read, but it had no point. And if I'd been editing, I would've gotten six to nine column precis and I would've, I would've put, I would've gotten some sociologist to explain what these black guys were talking about." And I said (laughter) to him, "You know Evan, that's exactly what we shouldn't have done, and the reason that it has been so wildly popular and why it was so successful was precisely because we didn't do that. We let these voices, we let people hear these voices unfetter, unfiltered." And so as I said, and the bottom line is that the story had this huge success. It was put on the cover and all I could remember was Ed Kosner [Edward Kosner] telling me we don't put black people on the cover. Because black people don't sell, in fact it was one of, if not the bestselling Newsweek cover of 1987. It appeared April in April 1987 [sic. March 23, 1987], it was so popular we made all, we would '[The] Phil Donohue Show,' the 'Today Show,' '[The] Oprah Winfrey Show,' just every, I mean every show you could imagine. I went on, went with some of the brothers, I would take them on the show, shows with me and it was so, it had such legs till then there was this query. And we turned, Peter and I sent back, 'Brothers' the magazine, we filed the four of us reported, we filed into Peter seven, 225,000 words. 'Brothers' the magazine piece was twenty-five thousand words, it was twenty-three pages in Newsweek. It was the longest story that had ever appeared in Newsweek to that time. Story_ID: 274405 Speaker 1: It [Newsweek article, 'Brothers'] was so popular William Morris approached us and we did, Peter [Goldman] and I, turned it into a book ['Brothers: Black and Poor - A True Story of Courage,' Sylvester Monroe and Peter Goldman], and the book was seventy-five thousand words, 'cause we had all of that rich stuff that we you know couldn't use, and we went back and put more pictures and whatnot. But anyway it was, it was the most successful and rewarding to that time story I had ever done as a Newsweek correspondent. Kind of put me on the map and you know just help launch from my career from that, as I said, my reward from that, I'm sorry. I misspoke, I was not a White House [Washington, D.C.] correspondent when we did it. I was a national correspondent with the Washington [D.C.] bureau. After that, coming off of that, I got named [The] Washington Post employee of the year and became and then was assigned to cover the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan, to the White House to cover the Reagan administration. Speaker 2: Now before we (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 2: Let's go back, I only want to go back there for a second and just ask you like in the process of going back and talking with these eleven young men your age who grew up with you in the Robert Tay- [Robert] Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois], what, were you surprised by, I mean, what was or what was the, I guess the most meaningful (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or what came out of that? Speaker 2: Came, came out of the meeting for you-- Speaker 1: Well. Speaker 2: I mean for, for you? Speaker 1: What, what it said was, I mean when we looked at these guys, the breakdown which is so bad, the breakdown you look at these guys. Three of them were, they were, they were three college graduates among us, there were five high school graduates, there were three or four veterans, one was dead and only one, and one was in jail. Which weren't bad odds when you, which was sort of a microcosm of what happens to black men in those, in those years. I mean in those times from the housing projects. What one of the points we got of it was that no one, black men, and let me back up. Somebody one of the editors, one of the reporters asked these guys, "Why would you do this? Vest [HistoryMaker Sylvester Monroe] is not one of you anymore. I mean he's a White House correspondent. He hasn't lived in a project for a long time, why did you trust him?" And [Edward] Half Man Carter was one of the guys who's, who's my best friend, he said, "You know there's two reasons I'm doing this. One," he said, "nobody asked me, ever asked me what I thought about anything, (laughter) and they asked." He said, "Two, is that Vest is one of us, his success is our success. When he does well, it shows what black boys can do from the projects can do everywhere." And I, that was, I always took that to heart because I thought you know I didn't ask for this, but it's really an honor and a privilege to be viewed this way. Because they could've turned on me, they could've said he had, "He's not one of us anymore. He doesn't care about us anymore." But yet they saw themselves in me, they saw what could've been you know, and what could still be perhaps for some of them. And, and lived, and, and said you know 'cause black, I mean contrary to what you think about black, young black males from the housing projects like Robert Taylors. You know it didn't have to be the way that it turns out for a lot of them. So that, and I think that was the message, the message was that you know many people look at these housing projects a certain way. And if they happen to see them, they pass by them or drive by them on the Dan Ryan [Expressway] or on State Street. If they you know if they have to go that way (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think we emphasized before this is like maybe a couple of miles-- Speaker 1: Yeah it's two and half miles. Speaker 2: Two and half miles. Speaker 1: I mean Robert Taylor itself is two and a half miles, but that project row, what we used to call project row on State Street starts at 22nd Street, Cermak [Road] with the [Harold L.] Ickes [Homes, Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And it went all the way to 50, to almost to Cer- I mean to Garfield [Boulevard], 55th [Street], that's, that's you know, that's almost four miles total. Robert Taylor Homes two and a half miles of it. Speaker 2: Sixteen stories? Speaker 1: Of sixteen story buildings now you know as I said twenty-seven thousand people all stuck together in you know, that's a small town, city. You know put together in this place and from it, you know there, there have been a number of peep, I mean Mr. T grew up in the building just a block away from where, where I was. Chaka Khan went to, went to DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois], Nat King Cole didn't live in the projects, but Nat King Cole, Sarah Vaughn all graduated from Wendell Phillips High School [Wendell Phillips Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], where I first went in that community. So it doesn't, so, you know, you know to paint a community with such a broad brush and say that these, these people you know are hopeless and we should give up on them, and there's no potential, it's just not true. And so what these guys saw in, in me was what could've been for them. And, and I think that's what, 'cause what we painted was a picture that said these people in this projects are no different than you. They have the same hurts, hopes, wants, needs, ambitions as everybody else, it's just that their lives have been transcribed by you know the triple whammy of, of race, poverty and, and social and cultural isolation. Physical isolation as well and this is what happens when you, when you do that. And so I think 'Brothers' had a huge impact. It's taught, in fact I just, just a couple of months ago, I just got interviewed by a woman in France who read 'Brothers' who's doing her Ph.D. dissertation. And wanted to, to talk to me, it's, it's they asked to translate it in, into French, it is taught at any number of universities still around here. So it's, its, I, it's a great point of pride, and it did exactly what I had always said I wanted to do as a journalist which was to bring people from disparate worlds together through the printed word. Story_ID: 274406 Speaker 1: All right so, Washington D.C. in the late '80s [1980s] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: I remember that as being a place where [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry was under fire for crack-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) yeah. Speaker 1: --epidemic which was brand new. Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly. So Marion, so at that time as I said I'm covering the White House [Washington, D.C.] for, I'm at the, I'm in Washington from '85 [1985] till '89 [1989] when I actually left Newsweek. And that was the story, I remember Marion Barry coming to me and saying he wanted me to help him write his biography. And I'm thinking to myself, I don't think I want to touch this (laughter) because, and I remember saying to him. I said, "Mar- Mr. Mayor, right now," you know, he, he wanted to tell a story of the guy who came up the rough side of the mountain from Itta Bena, Mississippi where he was from to become mayor of the nation's capital. And I said, "That's a great story Mr. Mayor, but you cannot ignore the fact that you were in the hotel room [at Vista Hotel; Westin City Center, Washington, D.C.] you know with this woman [Hazel Diane Moore] with a crack pipe. I mean you, you can't, I mean you gotta deal with it and then you can get to the other. Nobody's gonna care about the other unless you explain this, unless you own up to it," and he said oh, da, da. And so I decided it was just sort of, it was too hard that, that he wasn't willing or, or able to go where he needed to go to give it, to give it real sort of journally. He could do a book that his fans and his supporters would love, but his critics would just throw away. Speaker 1: Okay, there's a lot of things that coming together I mean journal- I don't know if what you knew or not the, the Iran-Contra [Affair] thing and, the, the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, well-- Speaker 1: Crack seems-- Speaker 2: Oh yes. Speaker 1: The White House-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: The mayor's office and everybody else (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah, crack, well. This is, we talking now, this is nineteen--the end of nineteen--this is the rise, I mean in the '80s [1980s] the rise of crack cocaine. That's another major stories going on. The Wall Street Journal wrote one of the best stories I ever seen about, it and in--which then became I think it became a Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] case--about the marketing of crack cocaine and wha- and how brilliant it was. Before the '80s [1980s], cocaine was a, was a drug of the rich and privileged: musicians, artists, entertainers, high, I mean because it was so expensive. Somebody and I don't know who it was, I mean I don't know that we any, that anybody knows or any one person. But the, what The Wall Street Journal story talked about was the genius, somebody who decided to create a form of cocaine so that you could sell it to the masses. And that is the rise of crack cocaine, it is also the rise, it is also the beginning of the demise of places like the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois]. Because when I lived there, they were, they had a bad reputation then, but in fact they were some of the best places that people like myself who had come from these rat infested, roach infested tenements on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] had ever lived. I mean I come to this day terrified of rats, because they would be rats, you could hear them in the walls of these tenements. When the Robert Taylor Homes opened in 1962, they were the best, they were clean, they were warm, which was something you know these drafty old places. I remember as a child being cold all the time, these things had heat; I mean you couldn't control the heat. The heat was in the elements in the floor and the ceiling and it was a funny thing in the middle of the winter in Chicago, you would see the windows open in these projects. And you'd see sometimes curtains be flying out because they were too hot, because this, this heat was blasting in there. But for me, it was a good thing, 'cause I said I rather be hot than cold (laughter) in the winter you know. So but they were clean, they well-run, contrary to popular belief, they were to intact families, these were working class families. Who and the projects were meant to be a kind of way station while you know worked and saved your money. And moved to one of those classic Chicago, three-bedroom, four-bedroom Chicago bungalows, right, farther on the South Side of Chicago. My mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] did it, many of my friends' families did it, and you got, and so you were never meant to stay in the projects. As this sort of upward mobility continues, then the crack cocaine hits and what happens is the, the, it becomes, it takes over in fact. Story_ID: 274407 Speaker 1: And the gangs, which had always been there, I was a member of the Black P. Stone Nation, I mean we were a part of, I mean we when we were the Eye Supreme Cobras [ph.], and then on 39th Street. And there were the Satan['s] Saints in Stine--in Stateway Gardens [Chicago, Illinois], which was the project just to the north. And then Jeff Fort, head of the Blackstone Rangers, the Black P. Stone Nation begins to expand, it start swallowing up all of the other little gangs. And so you're, you become, we instead of Eye Supreme Cobras, we were Eye Supreme Rangers [ph.], and, and so part of the Black P. Stone Nation. One of the things that happened then is the sale of drugs. Before, it'd a little marijuana, this that and the other. Some fights, fist fights, very few, very not as much gun violence as you would think. Now you're defending these drug turfs and, and people are making a ton of money selling crack cocaine, and it changed the nature of life in those projects. As the upward mobil- upwardly mobile began to leave and the people who were left are left in there who are the, the people with least means. Also as integration occurs and people are able to move out of these neighborhoods and to other, other neighborhoods, what's left in what was these neighborhoods that had businesses and you know. The Sealtest ice cream factory was, I, right there on 39th [Street] and between Wabash [Avenue] and Michigan [Avenue]. There were jobs there, factory, I mean when I was a kid there were jobs, there were all kinds of things, these things left. So what's left, how do you make a living, crack cocaine, this just didn't happen in the projects, happening in a lot of places. But anyway, that's the, that's the backdrop there, so as [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry is so you know what he thinks the mayor of the, of the nation's capital [Washington, D.C.] is found in a hotel room [at Vista Hotel; Westin City Center, Washington, D.C.] smoking crack you know with a woman [Hazel Diane Moore] and, and so forth. But what's, what's that's what's going on is that crack cocaine is the rise of crack cocaine. Now you talk about Iran-Contra [Affair] you know selling of I mean I happened to work later at the San Jose Mercury News [The Mercury News] where they do a story about Iran-Contra where you know they're selling crack in exchange for, to get money to support the Contras. It, it was this triangle, you know and I forget the exact, the exact sort of mechanism of it but it's funny crack cocaine for, or cocaine figures into world geo- world politics and whatnot. But it, and, and so you look today and, and that happens and, the interesting thing is that we had one of the reasons I left Washington [D.C.] is that the press corps, I'm beginning to think okay, what am I doing here covering the, the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan administration? And then the, the press corps had [President] George [Herbert Walker] Bush dead to rights on Iran-Contra, nobody cared, I mean we couldn't get anybody to pay attention. And so I said I don't wanna do this anymore. Story_ID: 274408 Speaker 1: What happens, 1988, I had been wooed by Time magazine for years. And so the likes of you know some people who were gonna take over Newsweek that I thought were going in a different direction, people had said that you know 'Brothers' was a good read but you know they wouldn't. And also it said to me that there'd never be another one, and I thought okay time for me to go. No animosity, I get a shot and I, so I leave Newsweek in nineteen--in the end of 1988, and go to Time magazine. Speaker 2: Now that's the biggest rival of Newsweek. Speaker 1: It is, it is the biggest rival of Newsweek and go to Time magazine and they say you can stay in Washington [D.C.], you can go to Chicago [Illinois], we have an opening or you can go to Los Angeles [California], and it turns out, I had never, I never really spent any time, I mean I had a fellowship at Stanford [University, Stanford, California] in 1979, '80 [1980], a journalism fellowship. And that had been my only real time in California, so I had a girlfriend who was gonna become my second wife who lived in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. So I moved to L.A. and became a, a Time correspondent, and the interesting thing, there my career continued to do--I covered some really big stories. And that's the thing, one of the things I haven't said about being a news magazine correspondent is that you get to cover a lot. Given the nature of the, they're national international news magazines, you got to cover--they were anyway--huge stories so I come here and I cover Rodney King, both trials, federal trial, I cover the Los Angeles riots, I cover the 1990, sometimes my memory is, '92 [1992] or '94 [1994] earth- '94 [1994] earthquake [1994 Northridge earthquake]. And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now I can start getting O.J. [Simpson], O.J.'s ninety-- Speaker 1: And O.J., O.J. Simpson, I'm here, I cover, I don't cover the trial, I actually cover what's going on outside of the trial. And I cover not from; I mean I was also a national correspondent here, so for them, so I'm going all over doing stories. I do stories on affirmative action, I actually, as a Time correspondent, got sent to cover the release of Nelson Mandela from, in South Africa. So these huge stories (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) These are all in the early '90s [1990s]-- Speaker 1: These are all early '90s [1990s]. And so I had a great, great run here at Time but, but one of the things that was happening is that the, the news magazines were, were really taking a hit and, and the rise of USA Today and what, I mean news, the news magazines were trying to redefine themselves. Who, I mean when I started at Newsweek, it was very clear what a news magazine was, they were magazines of record. If you read Newsweek or Time with your local newspaper, you could be well-informed about what the most important stories that happened in the world, that week. And that's what we did, we said okay you, we'll tell you the biggest story in national affairs and foreign affairs, in business, in education, in science, in media and so forth. And you could be a well-rounded inform- but then the, what the advent of people wanted shorter stuff, USA Today. And then of course much later, the Internet and the new twenty-four hour news cycle, now it's harder and harder and harder on a weekly cycle (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now how did CNN play a role in that? Speaker 1: Oh it absolutely CNN also I mean that, the thing is that news, I mean it started to turn around so much faster. Before, I mean there's the Associated Press and your daily newspaper, The New York Times. So what we did from week in and week out we take a big story that you already knew about, you'd already heard something about and we would say okay what is the value added? We're gonna tell you know this happened last week, but we're gonna tell you why it was important and why it's significant to you in your life, even though it didn't happen where you are. And it became harder and harder to do that with all these other mediums, with all you know with CNN and USA Today and as I say later much later the Internet. With things, with things you, you, you're finding out what's happened not within week or days, but in minutes. And so they, the news, news magazines have struggled, the print magazines, and as you we just saw, you know Newsweek, what a couple of weeks ago? The print edition of Newsweek (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Went out of business. Speaker 1: Went out and said, this is gonna be no more. Story_ID: 274409 Speaker 1: What I would say is the rest of, I mean what Time magazine did because I, I was able to go, to come here and because I had you know created the reputation as being, for one I was a very good, I think street reporter. And field reporter and I could go and get a story, I also cov- it's funny at, at Newsweek, or no I'm sorry not at Newsweek, at Time I also covered the all, almost all of the school shootings. The only one I didn't cover was Columbine [High School, Jefferson County, Colorado]. But I covered Paducah, Wiscon- I mean [West] Paducah, Kentucky [at Heath High School], Pearl, Mississippi [at Pearl High School], Conyers, Georgia [at Heritage High School] and these things begin, oh and Jonesboro, Arkansas [at Westside Middle School, Craighead County, Arkansas] where the two little kids [Mitchell Johnson and Andrew Golden] shot up this school, and those were big stories for us. But what I would say and, and actually I think we could in some ways come close to summing up. The, there was, I had this great run I mean what Rod Gander promised me was true that I got to, they showed me the world and they showed me this country. And I look and there were two first, I mean I was doing all this great work. But then there was always the frustration that this sort of frustration about being able to do, to tell non-white stories, the African American stories, the Latino stories, the stories to the fullest. And I'll give you a couple of examples of that, that sort of, that I think sort of say something about me and my career as a journalist. People often ask me what's your favorite story? And I say, there's too many, I, I mean I've done so many. O. J. Simpson, I ended up on the O. J. Simpson verdicts come down you know how that split America. When the verdicts came down and this, this, it's right on point to some of the biggest stories that I covered never got into the magazines that I covered, that I worked for. I used, there's a magazine called Emerge, I mentioned [HistoryMaker] George Curry. George Curry is a very good friend of mine, he is a HistoryMaker, he now heads the National Newspaper Association. He's editor-in-chief of the National Newspaper Association; he was editor of a magazine for a brief time called Emerge, a very popular but not so economically successful magazine, started by a guy named Wilmer Ames [Jr.] who was at Time magazine, or excuse me, Sports Illustrated he worked for Time Inc. And what, that magazine became for a small group of us, readers, dedicated readers who, who wanted to read serious long form journalism about stuff that was happening in America. George did just an incredible job and for me it became an outlet for stories that I wanted to do at Time but I couldn't get into Time magazine. Story_ID: 274410 Speaker 1: Example, the Million Man March, Time magazine, 1995, I believe, Million Man March, [HistoryMaker Minister] Louis Farrakhan is a big, big deal. And Time magazine sends me to Washington [D.C.] to do the story, I tell them before we do the story on the Million Man March itself, I said, "Wouldn't it be great if we did a story about black males? Because that's what the Million Man March is about." What I get is all this pushback, they say, "Well it's an important story, but we don't wanna Farrankhanize the issue." What is Farrankhanize the issue? This is not about Farrakhan. I said, "We would look so smart if we talk to, if we did a story about black males and what's going on with black males, and talk to some people." And so I get, "Well, are there really gonna be million people there?" I said, "I have no idea, but it's gonna be big." So we don't do it, so instead I say okay, you don't wanna do it, fine. Instead I ask for permission and I do a story about black males for Emerge magazine that comes out the, the week before the Million Man March. Now I flew--I lived in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]--I flew to Washington the weekend before that Monday that was to be the Million Man March. On the plane and I had some upgrades, so I'm sitting in first-class on American Airlines. There are twelve seats in six or seven of the seats there black men on that plane in first-class. Four of them are reading my Emerge magazine cover on black males, the cover that I had wrote. And I'm thinking, that could've been Newsweek. That could've been my employers. But fine, but I'm still feeling really good 'cause there, we get there it's a big deal, Time does its story in a very Time kind of way, I contribute to it, it's fine. But months later, the, the Emerge magazine cover story is a finalist in the National Magazine Awards, and there's a luncheon for the mag- when you do this. And being a finalist is like, it's like winning a, I mean being nominated for Academy Award [Oscar]. The National Magazine is the Pulitzer Prize of--the National Magazine Award is the Pulitzer Prize of magazine journalism. So we get there and I'm sitting there and they call my name as a finalist, and my editor from Time is there. And they call my name but they not, my name is not associated with Time. And he is not happy (laughter) and after that I was told that I couldn't freelance that much anymore. That they, that we couldn't use Time magazine that, that Time mag- that other, other organizations were using Time magazine resources too much, meaning me. But I'm saying why are you mad at me, I begged you guys, I brought this to you. I said we could've done this story, you said no, and so they had no problem with me taking a story like that. 'Cause they didn't care about Emerge until something that a Time magazine correspondent did in Emerge, you know, gets that kind of notoriety. But again, that's one of my great frustrations, I got the story out, it did well, but it didn't appear in Time magazine. Story_ID: 274411 Speaker 1: Nelson Mandela, I get sent by the chief of correspondents, first of all, this was on occ- an occasion; we had a bureau in Johannesburg [South Africa]. And there was a bureau chief there but [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson had gotten wind that he was going, that Nelson Mandela might be released. And so Jesse Jackson was going and so I'm the resident Jackson, you know, reporter. And they thought if Jesse's going, we want you with him, so you know they put me on a plane, and I fly you know twelve hours to London [England] and then twelve hours, ten hours from London to Johannesburg. And have to, and hit the ground, and so I get there, and the interesting thing about this story is that neither one of us, I just actually wrote this in a, we just had a--there's a book that just came out by John Stacks who is the former chief, who hired me at Time, former chief of correspondents and it's called 'Albest[: Untold Stories from the Correspondents for the Legendary Time-Life News Service,' ed. John Stacks]. All best used to be, was the way that news magazines correspondents would sign off their copy, say da, da, da, da, "All Best, [HistoryMaker] Sylvester [Monroe]." And so the titled book and it's a group of essays by former Time-Life News Service correspondents. Which is, it's really good book, just out, and I, so I could, I was asked to contribute and I contributed to it. And the story, one of the stories I contributed was what, this one that I'm going to tell. Which is that one of my frustrations was that some of the best stories that I did, I did for Time magazine but the stories never appeared in Time magazine. I, Jesse Jackson was not welcomed, as he often wasn't when he went to a lot of these places. But because of his stature, he got an audience and, and people sort of begrudgingly let him in, he was not welcomed in South Africa at that time. [F.W.] de Klerk never met with him, president, he met with some mid-level government officials, and he went around, he, we went to, to Cape Town [South Africa] and met with some people who were polite. Who, what's his name Paul, Jesus, I, I'll remember his name but major figure, South African figure. Anyway we get there and that happens, but being Jesse, Jesse Jackson being Jesse Jackson, Nelson Mandela does get released. And he's in Cape Town; he comes to Cape Town and gives this speech at the Cape Town City Hall. Jesse, Reverend Jackson gets us in and it's me and there was oh what's the guy's name, famous writer who wrote 'Brothers and Keepers[: A Memoir,' John Edgar Wideman] from Philadelphia [sic. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]? I'll think of his name, gre-, gre-, he's on the trip a young lady from, from Newsday, black woman, [HistoryMaker] John [E.] Davis, remember John from Chicago [Illinois], CBS? John Davis is there with a film crew and me, from Time magazine. We're inside, I'm sitting on the sofa, I mean I'm again here's this little kid from the South Side of Chicago and I'm thinking I'm sitting on the sofa between--and there's a picture of this. I'm sitting of the sofa between Nelson Mandela and Winnie Mandela (laughter) on and getting to interview them. I'm doing the first print interview. And it was such an awesome kind of moment; I mean I'm not easily awed. One of the things about having worked where I have worked, and seen the things that I, I really am not easily awed. But and there been few people stature of, stature that--one of them, as if, as if I digress for a minute. Again Jesse Jackson actually showed me the world, I traveled with Jesse Jackson to the Vatican [Vatican City] and I met Pope John Paul II. And I didn't, and I, I didn't expect to get this, but I met this man and he had sort of an aura around him. And I was really impressed and I remember Jesse saying to me as we walked into the Vatican, he says, "Homeboy, you are long way from the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois]," (laughter) and I thought a very long way. And I felt, had that same feeling sitting in the Cape Town City Hall with, with Nelson Mandela. At just as Jesse had not been welcomed warmly welcomed, I was not warmly welcomed by the Time bureau chief, who felt like I was encroaching, even though I had been sent by our boss the chief of correspondents. So I had this story, I had his interview; I'm one of the first print reporters to, American print reporters to interview Nelson Mandela. Not a word that I filed got into the magazine, the Johannesburg bureau chief, several days later got his interview with Nelson Mandela and that was our story. Story_ID: 274412 Speaker 1: So instead I wrote a story for Emerge and part of that story for Emerge it had a couple of things in it. One, one was I asked Winnie Mandela I said, "You know sometimes journalists ask really dumb questions, but I'm gonna ask you anyway. How do you, how does it feel to have your husband back?" And she said something very surprising. She said, "I'm so happy for Nelson [Mandela] but I fear it's going to be very difficult to become after twenty-seven years to become a proper African wife and walk," I can't remember where she said, "two or three paces behind my husband again." And it was very prophetic because she was never able to become Mrs. Mandela again in, in the way that one would expect it. The other thing is as I interviewed an Afrikaner member of parliament who was at the Cape Town City Hall [Cape Town, South Africa] and I asked him what he thought of Mandela's speech, and he said that he was so disappointed. He said, "He's saying the same thing now that he said when he went in jail." And I said to him, "Well, apartheid is still (laughter) you know the same as it was today, today as today as it was twenty-seven years ago. So why are you're surprised?" And then he, so this guy then he wants to change the subject. And I was wearing a Time magazine promotional watch; it has two faces, and bo- it kept different times. And he said, "That's a very nice watch. Where did you get that watch?" And I said, "Well it's, it's just a it's just a gift from, from Time. A guy that works at Time you know our PR [public relations] department gave it to me." And he says, "Well you know we can't get anything nice like that here in South Africa." And I'm thinking, what I'm thinking in my head is there's a reason you can't get anything nice like that because the sanctions are working. And I say to him, I say, "You know what, I'll tell you what, when apartheid ends, I will give you this watch." And he said, "Okay, deal." I said, "Give me, tell me where to send the watch" and a sure enough, a couple of years later, apartheid ends, and I sent him the watch. So I write this story for Emerge and I'm thinking this is one of the biggest stories of my life because I get to meet this man. You talk about somebody who I was in awe of. [HistoryMaker] John [E.] Davis who's this tough as nails pro, television reporter was there. And John gets like the first television interview, and I've told this story on John a number of times. But so John has the mic, Mr. Mandela's standing there and John's, "Mr. Mandela, how is that--," and he just burst into tears. "Mr. Mandela I'm so happy." And we all joke, and we's like, "John, get the interview first, cry later," (laughter). But we all understood because this is not just you know a story this is history, and we were there. And the reason I was there, was because I was a Time magazine correspondent. Story_ID: 274413 Speaker 1: The other story that people ask me about there, there's a couple, is--what my favorite story was--is one of them is we did a cover story on in 1993 [sic. 1994] I believe on [HistoryMaker Minister] Louis Farrakhan. Time magazine, Louis Farrakhan was big in the news then, and Time decides it wants to do a cover and so they send me to Chicago [Illinois] to get the interview. Now we do all this other stuff, I mean it's all this controversy I mean this at this time again the Jewish community and Farrakhan, 'cause Farrakhan has made these anti-Semitic statements and blah, blah, blah. Speaker 2: That's when they got the tape from his was his (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, where he has said, and, and thing of this is that Time magazine they, has said that--also what was going on was Khalid [Abdul] Muhammad was going around on this tour. And I remember being at one of these things and Khalid would sa- I mean it was, he was a great speaker much like Farrakhan. And he'd come in and he'd say, "Okay, I see there's some white people in the audience, buckle up it's gone be a bumpy ride" (laughter). And, and he start off on this you know on this sort of diatribe about you know devils and da, da, da, da. And so Newsweek wants to do this story but there's great controversy within, I mean it's not Newsweek within Time about whether we should do this story. And partic- some of the Jewish members of the staff are just saying you know, this is a travesty, this is awful. There's one woman in particular, she says, "I just think it's awful that we, we cannot put that awful man on the cover of Time magazine." And I said, "Well, wait a minute, wait a minute. We're not in the business of doing stories about people we like you know. We're in the business of doing people, stories about people who make news." And then I made the point that Time magazine put Adolf Hitler on the cover because and called him the Man of the Year. Because the Man of the Year it's not about whether you're good or bad or we like you, it's who captured the news, who is the focus of the news for that year. Who had the most impact and in that year, that they put Adolf Hitler on the cover as Man of the Year, that's the, it was the right call. He was the man who just you know, was, was the focus of the international news. I said Louis Farrakhan is newsworthy and that's what--so they send me down there and I go and, and so I'm sitting in this hotel room in Chicago and I'm waiting and waiting. And this great big story, we've done the other story, there's a team of us who to do this story. And I'm waiting and then I get a call from the editors of Time saying when you get the interview, let us know 'cause we want to fly out and we want to sit in on it. And I'm thinking, I don't think so, I don't say anything, and I'm thinking there's no way, and if three of them want, there's no way that I can walk three white men into this interview with Louis Farrakhan if get it. Because at that time he wasn't talking to anybody in the mainstream media. And so I just don't, and so the, the I get the last minute, I get invited, they get, they call me and they say Brother [HistoryMaker Sylvester] Monroe, Minister will see you now at such and such time. I tell them, I actually knew the day before when it was gonna be and I tell them I just got it, there's no time. 'Cause I'm saying, if I had walked in there Louis Farrakhan was giving me an interview, Sylvester Monroe an interview. He knew me, he had known me from the [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L.] Jackson campaign, we had done a number of stories. I had done also done stories on POWER products when he had lunched, launched POWER products and whatnot. So he was giving the interview to me, and if I'd walked in there with these four white, three white guys who could not otherwise have gotten that access, my credibility would've be in the toilet. And so it was one of these, it's, it's one of these lines that I have always walked in my career, working for the mainstream white press who in some ways use me to get access to places where they otherwise couldn't get access, so it's a fine line. I mean I have a duty and an obligation and responsibility as a correspondent for Time magazine, regardless of my color to do. But so it's, it's always been a fine line and in, and I'm not uncomfortable with it, but I've had, it's been uncomfortable sometimes. Story_ID: 274414 Speaker 1: Anyway I get this interview I'm supposed to have twenty minutes and it's at the, the Nation [of Islam]. It's at [HistoryMaker] Mr. Minister [Louis] Farrakhan's home, which was Elijah Muhammad's home, this palatial thing in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]. And we go in and it's supposed to be twenty minutes, two hours, sit there and he gives me this wonderful interview. Places, plays the violin for me, whatever, and so we get back, so I'm, I'm feeling really good. I got this story I get back, we do it and then this issue about how the language on the cover. They wanted to call it 'Ministry of Hate,' and I said come on guys, we can't, we can't do that, so we back and forth and settle on 'Ministry of Rage.' There's a woman, one of the Jewish members of the staff comes to me and she said, "I feel like my people have been betrayed. That that you know I don't know that I can work at Time magazine anymore." What I said to her, I said, "You know by that def- I mean I've been working at Time magazine. Every single week I feel like my people are being betrayed. If you look at what's on the cover of Time magazine or--so come on, get a grip." And then I'm thinking I'm all, the hurd- I'm almost over the last hurdle and you know it, we, we get the pub letter which the thing where the editor writes what the biggest stories of that week are. And Jim Gaines [James R. Gaines] was his name, he was the editor at the time, and he writes, "We do this so that we may expose Louis Farrakhan for the racist anti-Semite dotty, dotty that he is." And I say whoa, that's if you do that; take my name off this story, you, that's not why we, and he goes well if you got. So I get [HistoryMaker] Jack White, friend of mine who is also on part on this package and a Time correspondent, [HistoryMaker Reverend] Julie Johnson [Staples], black woman who is a correspondent in the Washington [D.C.] bureau and Jan Simpson, who was an editor, black woman. And we go into Jim and we say you, this, you can't write that, and so Jim to his credit, says well if you guys hate it so much, you take it, rewrite it. So we take and all we do is rewrite it and it says, "We, we do this so that readers of Time magazine may listen and judge for themselves," blah, blah, blah. Which is what we're supposed to do that's what it does, anyway this story the magazine cover story wins the National Magazine, National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] magazine writing award. And I remember going up to accept the award and I get the award, and what I said was I had never been prouder to be a correspondent for Time magazine because this was a really tough call for a lot of people. And that's what we do, and that's when, that's the way it should've worked. This time I get in the magazine, I didn't, I didn't offend you know. I, I didn't step on you know the sensibilities of black people or the Nation of Islam. Now I remember Minister Farrakhan never said a word to me about it, one of his, his I think it was Akbar Muhammad calls me and said, "Brother Mon, Brother [HistoryMaker Sylvester] Monroe, nice try," (laughter) and that's all he said. But I knew coming from them that was as good as it was gonna get, and so I figured I had done my job. And you know I had, I mean it was one of the toughest tightropes I had ever walked, because you know I had to also deal with my credibility as a Newsweek as a Time correspondent on that side. So, but anyway, that's the kinds of things, that's you know the kinds of things that I dealt with my entire career. And I think I've, I've won more than I've lost, and I think I've done, if you wanna say do some good, why did we become journalists? I became a journalist as I said to try and do some good to people, get people to understand people that they wouldn't under- that they would never meet and they would never understand, if they didn't hear. And so one of the things in that story was I, I told Minister Farrakhan, I said one of the things I can promise you is that I will give you an audience of people who never really listened to you and they will hear your voice unfettered. Because what did in addition to the main story from my interview, we did a Q and A [question and anwer] with him so that it's his words, they didn't get filtered. And you do edit it, I mean the interview is long but so I think he was pretty happy with that, and I was pretty happy with that, so. Story_ID: 274415 Speaker 1: It seems to me that the stated mission of trying to get people to hear people that they've never listened to before I mean it puts you almost in a position of working for mainstream media and being from the black community being a diplomat almost. Speaker 2: Well yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean the negotiations you described are (unclear). Speaker 2: Yeah and that's the way, I mean that's the way I kind of have looked at my, my life and, and my career. I as, as, I've been able for some reason I've been able to see, and I recently gotten-- I've gotten interviews as a Time magazine correspondent, I'll tell ya. I got an interview with the Grand Wizard of the Klu Klux Klan [KKK]. And but we did it on the phone, and he thought, he just assumed that I was white. Because he assumed the Atlanta [Georgia] bureau chief of Time magazine is white. On the phone, he couldn't tell who I was. So he's going on and he's talking and he's saying, he's saying dotta, and he invites me to a cross lighting on Stone Mountain [Stone Mountain, Georgia] (laughter) at a cross lighting ceremony. And I said, "Well you know I think I'll pass." He says, "Come on now you know we got, we get a bad rap," he said, "you know we don't, I mean hoods and you know sheets and stuff, we don't do that man." It was very funny, he says, "Well we got a couple of guys who like to do but we don't (laughter) we don't do that anymore." He said, "It's a, it's like a family thing, I mean we barbeque, we, it's a cross lighting ceremony and I mean I don't, we'd love have you come." And I said, "Well thank you, I really appreciate it, but I appreciate it." But I, but the thing of it is that I, I have this ability I think, to listen without, without showing any bias. And because of that, this man on the telephone thought that I was giving him, and I was, I was listening to hear what he had to say. And you know I don't believe in it. Same thing there was a, do you remember a guy named Ward Connerly? Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, here in California? Speaker 2: Yes, here in California. Ward Connerly had the rap of be- who was anti-affirmative action. Ward said affirmative action was a blight stigmatized people, gonna have no part of it. So I do this interview with Ward Connerly, now we both know who each other were. And I talk to Ward Connerly and I'm listening, 'cause I wanna hear how he believes that, and, and that affirmative action you know is a bad thing. And he goes through it and then I get to the end and I ask, and I say, "So you're telling me that you have never benefited in the least bit from affirmative action?" But I've done my homework and he said absolutely, and I said, "But your wife [Ilene Connerly] who is white owns this company that gets government affirmative action kind of stuff. And the only reason that she gets it is because you and her make the ownership 50.1 percent minority. And, therefore, you get--," and he goes, "well that's different." How is that different (laughter)? It's affirmative action. So we go on to that, anyway he sa- he hated the story that I wrote, and he said that the rea- he wrote a ten-page thing saying that the reason that [HistoryMaker] Sylvester Monroe likes affirmative action so much is that he has a vested interest in it. And I wrote back to him you're absolutely right, I do (laughter) I'm a, I'm a product of it, without it, I might not be where I am. But it hasn't stigmatized me in the least bit, it's so. So anyway it's, it's yeah I mean I, I look at myself as sort of an ambassador, I've never used that, that phrase but--and the thing of it, the thing of it is that I grew up, it helps, I mean what I get from it is I have met these extraordinary people. And been in these extraordinary situations that I'd never would've met, otherwise met and, and I grow. I mean one of the things, it's like, when I got this first job at Newsweek I thought wow, I get to, I get to do what I was doing in school, which is to learn things and write papers sort of, and I get paid for it too. And I travel and I meet all these people and that's been the joy, the great joy of, of what I do. Even though I'm not a reporter anymore, I'm a, I'm a, I'm an editor now, and occasionally I get to do, I, I mentioned to you that I did this story back in I just did it. When were we, August, September you know a producer and I went back to Robert Taylors [Robert Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois] to do it, I'm, I'm actually going to do one, I should be back in Chicago [Illinois] next week. To do a story on the economics of gun violence in the City of Chicago, and we're either gonna do Terror Town on, on South, on South Shore or somewhere in, in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois]. Where this violence continues and, so I get this, you know, it's, it's I, I don't want to be out there being a reporter anymore 'cause it's a young man's job. I've been doing this for, I can't believe for almost forty years. Story_ID: 274416 Speaker 1: Now you were a senior editor of Tavis Smi- 'The Tavis Smiley Show'? Speaker 2: Yes, that, after I left, so I left Time magazine my Time mag- my news magazine career ended in 1980, excuse me, 1990, in 2000 actually. I had been the Atlan- the Atlanta [Georgia], the South bureau chief of, of Time Atlanta. And I got this call from the San Jose Mercury News [The Mercury News] to, to come and be the assistant managing editor for national, foreign, business and technology news. And I'm saying wait a minute, wait a minute guys the national and foreign makes sense, I've been done national and, but I don't know a bit from a chip. And he says that's why we want you to, we want you because you know we got these really good tech reporters who think that the Silicon Valley is the center of the universe. Now this 2000, we're at the height of the tech boom and the San, San Jose Mercury News is trying to compete with The Wall Street Journal with the coverage of technology. So I get there and they put me in charge, I've got a hund- a quarter of the newsroom under me. I got a 104 of the 417 reporters. I'm the assistant managing editor. I've got the business editor under me, the national editor, the foreign editor and the Sunday perspective editor under me. And I've never edited at this level before, so or managed at this level, I've edited. And it was a really challenging thing, so that lasted for, I mean I hire sixteen people; I have a business department, bigger that metro, fifty-five reporters and editors. And it's going great and then the bubble burst in the Silicon Valley, and that sort of goes south. So I lasted, I stayed there two years [sic. one] and I quit voluntarily three days before 9/11 [September 11, 2001]. If anybody had told me what was gonna, my going away party was September 8th, 2011 [sic. 2001]. If anybody would've told me what was gonna happen that following Monday, on, I would've never quit my job. But so, I, I quit because I just don't want to manage downsizing, and that's what I was doing. The Journal is--it had been such fun, but you know, so I take, I get a buyout and I decide that I'm going to Brazil. So I go to Brazil with a friend and start, and I'd never been to Brazil, having fun and while I'm in Brazil, I get a phone call from [HistoryMaker] Tavis [Smiley]. Actually this is now 2003, I'd quit in 2001. For that year, I was gone, I was gonna be off six months, but the world had changed. I come back; I thought I was up for a job to be the op-ed page editor of the Los Angeles Times. First time I, I never, I didn't get a job that I had applied for, even though I was recruited. But I wasn't you know, it didn't bother me so much, Tavis Smiley calls and now he's at NPR West and says he needs , a supervising senior editor. And could I come down and, and fill in for him, I had met Tavis through my ex-wife who was a producer at KABC here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Tavis was doing commentary, I had met I mean and so Tavis used to come and play Scrabble at our house with my kid, my son [Jason Monroe] and me. And I liked him; he was an interesting smart guy. So I go and I do this for him for a little while, but then Tavis and I had some, some professional sort of issues, and I left there after a couple of months. But that's what, that's how, that was my first dabble in radio, in public radio, NPR [National Public Radio], and I liked it. Anyway I had to find another job so I get, I ended up at The Atlanta Journal-Constitution in 2004. And I become the Sunday national editor: the guy who's in charge of deciding what stories we do. Story_ID: 274417 Speaker 1: As the Sunday national editor [at The Atlanta Journal-Constitution (AJC)], I was the guy who's in charge of, of deciding what stories to do in national and international news for the Sunday paper. And that was a good job, although the description lasted like a lot of these things, the things that they said I was gonna be doing and not doing lasted about two weeks. And then I was doing everything. And one of the best things about that is that the AJC had a, had an award winning section, weekly section called Atlanta and the World. Which was about international news that happened in Atlanta [Georgia] or in the world that impacted Atlanta. And at first I didn't want to do it 'cause I, it meant I was tied down to you know editing a weekly section. But I didn't, but it turned out it was the, what made that job fun because I got to do national and international news at a local newspaper. And it was a lot of fun. Until, and again, so, the story of my career from that point on and actually be, has been the slow painful demise of print journalism. That everywhere I've gone, I've been you know, it's been just you know you could hear the footsteps of the Grim Reaper (laughter) coming. Cutbacks this that and the other, the move toward local news and local, local, local, and my whole career has been national and international news. So stayed at the, stayed at the journal for I mean at The Atlanta Journal-Constitution from 2004 till 2006. And left there and then another opportunity came up, [HistoryMaker] Bryan Monroe, who had worked with me at the San Jose Mercury News [The Mercury News] had become the first outside editor of Ebony. He became vice president and editorial director Ebony magazine in August 2006. I was the first person he hired, and he hired me as the senior editor. Though before he hired, me he had me go again, and this is an interesting I mean a sideline to my career. My association with [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson at various places has opened so many doors for me; I mean I first started to cover Jesse Jackson as a reporter in the Chicago [Illinois] bureau in 1977 for Newsweek. And when he was, he was then boycotting Anheuser-Busch [St. Louis, Missouri] and 7-UP, and I went to St. Louis [Missouri] when he did this. And that was my first real association with him as a journalist. Over the years you know the '84 [1984 presidential] campaign, the '88 [1988] campaign so on and so forth. I got asked by the editor, I was in Atlanta, could I go with Jesse Jackson to the Middle East? Because the, they're, the one, the reporter they wanted, the young reporter they wanted to do it at Ebony her passport has expired (laughter) and then the Washington [D.C.] guy, his wife said that she thought it would be too dangerous. And I remember telling him, I said, "You know what, it may be, but it may be but let me just tell you that, that's not something you wanna say publically (laughter) even if it's true." Story_ID: 274418 Speaker 1: As I said, again [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson enters my life, and [HistoryMaker] Bryan [Monroe] says that, that his reporters are not able to go and I'm jokingly, I don't even, I'm not even sure what he wants. And I said, "So I suppose you want me to go to the Middle East with Reverend Jackson." And he says, "Could you?" And I said, "Well yeah," 'cause I had quit my job up at the, at the Atlanta Journal-Constitution I was in Atlanta [Georgia], and this is a Wednesday night. And he says, "Well I need you to go to Kinko's tonight and get two passport pictures, visa pictures and, and put them on a Delta Dash, so that we'll have them in the morning. Because we have to get them to the Zambian embassy and the," and the, I can't remember the other embassy. And I'm saying, "Are you kidding me?" And so I do this, get them, and by Friday, I'm in, Friday I come I'm in Chicago [Illinois] talking to Bryan and [HistoryMaker] Linda Johnson Rice. And Saturday I'm on, Friday night I'm on a plane and Saturday, and Saturday I'm in Amman, Jordan with Jesse Jackson. We go to Israel, we go to, and the reason we went was because was again Reverend Jackson thought that he might be able to get the release of some prisoners. Some people held by Hiz- Hezbollah in Lebanon and by Hamas in Gaza [Gaza Strip]. And we actually, he actually meets with some Hezbollah guys when we're in; we're in Beirut [Lebanon] and while we were in Gaza, doesn't get any prisoners. But it was an interesting trip, because it was the first time I had ever been to the Middle East in all my travels. So we did, I come back and I'm trying to get Linda to be interested in a start-up that I'm trying to work on in, in Atlanta. And she says, "Vest [HistoryMaker Sylvester Monroe], I'm not interested in investing in you know in your start-up, it looks really interesting." It was called Mecca, a magazine. And I said, and she said, "But I am interested in investing in you. How'd you like to be a senior editor for Ebony?" And the next thing I knew I'm on the Ebony staff as a senior editor, working and had a really--it could have been and it was for a time the best journalism job I ever had. Because I had come full circle, I was back in magazine journalism which is my first best love. And I was back home in Chicago both my professional home and my personal home, and there was a lot going on. And one of the biggest things going on was [HistoryMaker] Barack Obama. There was, there was all this talk and so I was supposed to be the political, I was named the political director by Bryan. To direct our political coverage, but the next thing I know I'm getting sent by Bryan because there's nobody really on the staff who knew how to cover a national political campaign, and so I get sent out. And I'm sent to the announcement and then I'm sent, and the next thing know, I'm on the plane (laughter) with the, with the (unclear). And I mean, I'm--I sort of tongue-in-cheek complained. I said, "You know I don't do this anymore. I'm an editor, I don't, I'm not a reporter." But you know I have been so blessed in my career, I mean how many people can say that they covered Jesse Jackson's political campaign from start to finish, both of them? And [President] Barack Obama's campaign from start to finish and who have the context to see how they connect with each other, and how they work. And in that context to see how we have moved as a country from where we were in 1984 to where we are in 2012, and see, and make that direct connection. I mean make that line, see the line and not just to witness it as I've said before, but to have been a part of it. And you know it's, it's as I say, I had a great, great ride and I still got a couple of times around the block. 'Cause like a lot of folks I've I mean my age, I had to range, reinvent myself. I'm an editor here at 'Marketplace' and once again what I know and what I can do has gotten me the opportunity to go out again and do stories and meet people and try and bring people in way, together in a way that you know I've been trying to do all my life. And so I just think that I'm blessed to, to still be doing it and you know stay tuned for the next chapter (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah it seem to me that you and yeah and it does almost seem as really for intuitively you seem to be assigned (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 2: --to places-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --where the biggest national news jump off. Speaker 1: Right, I've been lucky that way. The only downside to it is that I go to hotspots and when places are hot like that, the real estate market is really high. So I've always bought at the top of the real estate market and never really made a killing on it. But it's, it's a small price to pay. Speaker 2: But it's interesting the biggest stories in the black community, a lot them, I mean you go to the West Coast, Rodney King, O.J. Simpson, all this is going on then when you're there, when you're in Chicago, Harold Washington campaign is going on, that's a huge story, Jesse Jackson run- running for president and you seem to, you know just at the right time. Speaker 1: It's, it's, that's, that's a good way to put it and being at the right place at the right time. Somebody once said to me about being able to get out of the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois], they said you were really lucky weren't you? And I said yeah, I was very lucky but I define luck as the intersection between preparation and opportunity. My preparation has, has paid off when the opportunities of these big stories have come out. Because I was in the right place, whether it was Jesse Jackson or this story here to go to Chicago last month, and then to go back to Chicago. The only reason we're doing that story is because of my experience and the fact that of who I am and they think that given who I am I might bring something to that story that we might not be able to get in another way. So yeah, you know, I'm very lucky in that sense. Story_ID: 274419 Speaker 1: I didn't ask you this, but I asked you this about the [Harold] Washington campaign but did you have a feeling that [HistoryMaker] Barack Obama was gonna win the (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right up until, I'm glad you ask because, you talk about my favorite stories. Right up till the end in 2008, I was not convinced that he was gonna win, I wanted to believe he was gonna win. I read, I wrote a couple of stories for Ebony one that said, one that won an award actually. That said you know that many black people like my, my family, my mother [Hattie Monroe Kelley] and my father [Kittrel Peoples] who was still alive then, said they were afraid that he would be killed. Nobody would talk about it but when I was a kid, they used to say you know black man's gotta stay in his place, and if he gets too big, and, and out of his place they'll kill him. And I worried about that, and I also worried that not enough white males would vote for him, for him to become president of the United States. Well the coalition, so it happened, my father died of lung cancer in 2008, and he had always said--he was seventy-seven years old when he died--he said you know, "I wonder in my lifetime I will ever see a black president." That was a question I'm sure your family and my family and others, we've always had: will we see a black president in our lifetime? My father was, was very sick when Barack Obama won the Iowa caucus and, in January of 2008, I was with him, I was on, I mean standing on the floor. I get a phone call, it's my father, he's very weak and he, and he says, "[HistoryMaker] Sylvester [Monroe] I'm, watching, I know you're there, dare I hope that in my lifetime I might see a black president elected?" I said, "Dad, I don't know, but this is the best shot I think that we ever had or may ever have." And sure enough--he didn't, and so he didn't live, he died, that was January, he died in March so he didn't get to see it. But that phone call inspired me; I wrote another cover story for Ebony with Barack Obama on the cover it's called 'In Our Lifetime[: Are We Really Witnessing the Election of the Nation's First Black President?' Sylvester Monroe]. And it talked about how [President] Barack Obama did it, and I, was, it was just I, I, I'm glad you asked 'cause I had forgotten about that. But being at the right place at the right time, and so the second time around, I didn't think, this time, I was not convinced again that he was gonna win. Though by the end, I thought maybe, I didn't want it to be close, because I was afraid that if it was close we might have a repeat of Florida. And somehow you know my faith was restored, but, but it was, it was nice to see. Story_ID: 274420 Speaker 1: You also won an NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] award in 2008 for 'The Africa You Don't Know' [Sylvester Monroe]. Speaker 2: That was another, as I said, Ebony was a good, good run, I covered-[President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton through his Clinton Foundation does every year a trip, it's a fundraiser to Africa. He goes and does work on AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], famine, clean water, whatnot in various African nations. In 2000, and, and you can as a journalist, you can only go by invitation. So Ebony was invited to send a reporter on that, on the 2007 trip or was it 2006, 2006 or '07 [2007]. And I was sent; [HistoryMaker] Bryan [Monroe] and [HistoryMaker] Linda [Johnson Rice] thought, "Vest [HistoryMaker Sylvester Monroe], we want you to go we'd never sent anybody on--." So we go and we go to meet Nelson Mandela first of all, we made a stop and we and 'cause its Nelson Mandela's ninetieth birthday I think that was at that time or eighty-ninth birthday. And he and Bill Clinton are close, so we go and just on the side here another one those moments in my you know little boy who grew up to be a journalist career. I told you I had, I'd met Nelson Mandela when he was released from prison, well this is sixteen years later now, and President Clinton is about to introduce me to Nel- he was introducing all of us one by one to Nelson Mandela. And I walk up to Mr. Mandela whose in a, in a chair and Bill Clinton says "And this is one of our-" and Nelson Mandela says looks up and he says, "I know that we have met before, we met in Cape Town [South Africa]." And I was blown away that he would remember me sixteen years later, because they were saying you know his mind was not as clear as it used to be. But he absolutely, I mean people will tell you they remember you and they don't, but he absolutely did. And then somebody, and then somebody, the president made (laughter) Bill Clinton later made a joke he said, "Well Pat [ph.], you know they not a whole lot of you black guys here (laughter) so it's easy for him to remember." And they may have been some truth to that, but that was, that was a great moment. So I, so we go, we do that and we go to Zambia, we go to Tanzania, we go to Malawi, we go to a couple other places. And as a result of this trip, I put together this story called 'The Africa You Don't Know' because it was my first, it wasn't my first time in Africa, but it was my first extensive travels through Africa. Getting to go on safari with Bill Clinton and whatnot, something I never thought I would never do. And I, we do this story and I do, and we have such great response, I said we should do a se- so we do a twelve-month series. And the first one was, was the beginning and the series was called "The Africa You Don't Know," and I did the first one and I did the last one. Interviewing six sitting African presidents about the future of Africa, and in between we had our commissioned stories from various places in Africa about Africa or ab- and about Africans in the diaspora. And it went over very well, we in fact won the National Association Black Journalist convention award for that, so. Speaker 1: Okay, once again for young peop- people that preparation meaning opportunity (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Speaker 1: --can make a-- Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, it's, it's, you know if you do the work, if you do the work, or you will almost, you'll I mean--[HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson, again who I come back to who as I said I have this love-hate relationship. We have this professional and purse, personal relationship that you know has, that I think, that we have, we have kept you know properly separate. I have a healthy respect for him as a professional and as a, as a man, but and, and have this love-hate relationship with him critically. But, but he has, he once said of me, he said, "Sylvester, you're going to make me," I don't know how did he put it? He said he introduced, he said, "Sylvester, made me," oh "Sylvester helped make me famous and I made him a star" (laughter) and I thought, I'll take that (laughter). Story_ID: 274421 Speaker 1: Certain questions we ask on the way out although and one of them is: what is some of your hopes and concerns for the African community today? Speaker 2: I'm very concerned about the African American community today because I think with the rise of the Latino community in terms of numbers; I think that there are some pitfalls and some major kinds of, of potholes and risk that we run as a community. Not being the number one minority anymore, I mean we're not quote the chosen ones anymore, and I think people think almost as if we are, it's passe. Take for instance here in Los Angeles [California]; politically this city once had a black mayor. There are fifteen seats on the, on the city council, here, of those fifteen seats, three of them were almost always guaranteed simply by demographics, by numbers to be black. Those numbers have shifted, those districts, the sev- the eighth, ninth, and tenth city council districts here. There still black at the moment, but those districts are now predominately Hispanic [Latino], and the mayor is Hispanic. So and, and we have not built kind of coalitions that we needed, we have not been good in building coalitions to continue to have some sort of political influence. So I worry on that level, I also worry that some of the rhetoric that your hear in the, in the [Mitt] Romney campaign about people you know just wanting gifts and handouts and whatnot. And this sort of mean spirited talk about us not becoming a socialist country, and, and the erosion of the social safety net. My concern is that there are not nearly as many opportunities for young black boys like me when I was a kid in the Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois]. There are not as many opportunities today for, for kids like that as there were for me, and that's a travesty. And it's also something that I think we should be very concerned about, I mean this story I'm gonna go do in Chicago [Illinois]. One of the reasons, I mean when you think about the violence, one of the reasons, in a place like you know South Shore [Chicago, Illinois] or Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] is that, where these play, is that there absolutely very few opportunities that, there that's one thing. On the other hand, in our own community, we have lock- we have lost sight of the vision that it is education. Now the single common denominator if you look at any person, African American or anything, any other besides athletes and entertainers. You say they're, they're successful, however you want to decide, they have an education, they have the best education that they can get. We, there isn't even a connection now between being in those communities and getting an education as the way out or up. We, these kids don't see it anymore, and that has me profoundly concerned about our communities. Story_ID: 274422 Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing you would do differently? Speaker 2: Not really, I had always said that when I was a young reporter that I wanted to you know cover a major; I wanted to cover a major trial. I wanted to cover a presidential campaign, I wanted to cover a war, I wanted to cover a riot. What else, five, things, anyway, I've done them all except really cover a war, and I came close and the older I get I don't wanna cover a war (laughter) anymore. Though I did have, I have been to war spots I mean in El Salvador, I had a sixteen-year old put an M16 in my face and ask me for my credentials. That was as close to war as I wanted to get. But not, I have no, nothing I would really have done any differently. Story_ID: 274423 Speaker 1: Likewise as you look back at it, what today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: As I said, I would think that you know there are young, my legacy I hope is that there are young black journalists today who could look at--there are two things, one is I think I left a body of work that you could look at and see and hopefully see that you know that I, that I helped the word, that I helped people in the world understand themselves and each, and each other better. That, that I think that would be my, the legacy that I would want. And the other would be that young African Americans, kids, not just who want to be journalists, but who can really believe, can look at my life and say in a real way that you know you can do it. I mean if you really want to do something, there are ways to do it, no matter what the obstacles. Because, by, by the conventional wisdom would've said that I should not have been able to do what I have done. Story_ID: 274424 Speaker 1: Tell us a little about your family, you have children, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I have, and that's the other part of my legacy, I have two children. I have a daughter [Sherita Monroe] who unbelievably who was born when I was eighteen, she is now the mother of three kids. She lives in Nashville [Tennessee]; she's married to a wonderful guy who's a tech, an IT [information technology] guy. Their oldest, my child's boy who's twenty-one. He's a really fine artist at Savannah College of Art and Design in Atlanta [Georgia]. I have a fifteen-year old granddaughter who is a freshman in high school who just gotten named to the National Honor Society. And her younger sister's twelve who's doing really well, she's in eighth grade. And I expect great things from 'em. My son [Jason Monroe], who graduated from St. George's School [Middletown, Rhode Island] like I did. He was the legac- the first; he was the first child of an African American graduate of St. George's School to graduate from St. George's School. And I'm really proud of that, he went to Babson College [Wellesley, Massachusetts] and he's a techie, he's a software analyst, lives in Greenville, South Carolina. Has two children, one of them a little boy who's four and a little girl who just turned one. So again I've been very blessed, I have two wonderful children who never caused me any trouble (laughter) and they have children who are wonderful. And so I never thought I would embrace this grandpatum [ph.], but I, but I really do it's a won, it's a, it's now the greatest joy in my life is, is sort of looking at my kids and, and my grandkids and that's saying something. Because my professional life has been a great joy. Story_ID: 274425 Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as this, as this little guy, as this poor kid once former poor kid from the, you know, from the ghetto who actually made himself a citizen of the world. Through education through my work, through my outreach to people that, that you know I never let anyone circumscribe my life. I never let anybody put boundaries, that's how I'd like, I mean simply put, you know, a citizen of the world...