 Story_ID: 37555 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: I am Clarence Eugene Page. That's C-L-A-R-E-N-C-E, E-U-G-E-N-E, Page, P-A-G-E. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: I was born June 2nd, 1947 in Dayton, Ohio. Speaker 1: All right, and, sir, what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I am a journalist, in general. I write a syndicated column for the 'Chicago Tribune' that appears in about a couple hundred newspapers, as many as are remaining in business in this digital age. And I also appear on a number of TV programs that invite me on to give commentary. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today is--I have no idea what today's date is actually (laughter). No, today is January--I know we're in June, still in June, 2010, June 28, 2010, I am told. Okay, very good. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We're in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] in the Chicago Tribune Bureau. Speaker 1: All right. Story_ID: 37556 Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight, 'People Magazine'-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: The first of these questions is, do you have a favorite food and what is it? Speaker 2: A favorite food? I suppose that changes every time somebody asks me. But today I have a hankering for barbeque. I'd say barbeque ribs, cooked Tennessee style (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Favorite color? I don't, let me see. I'd say purple sounds good today. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year, I suppose would be springtime, when the flowers are in bloom, and we can shake winter off us, especially important in Chicago [Illinois] (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination. I'd say, in general, the Caribbean is my favorite. It's convenient and warm and very relaxing. Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Let me see (laughter), a favorite phrase (laughter). I suppose my son would probably say it was, "You must think money grows on trees," (laughter) which I got from my father, and I thought was ridiculously inane, but now it makes so much sense. I just can't tell you. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay. Story_ID: 37557 Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we're gonna start with your mother's side first. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: Well, it depends on which mother you're talking about because my, the mother who raised me was Maggie Lee Williams Page. But my natural mother, my biological mother was Helen Hood who was, who actually passed when I was about two years, less than two years old. I was actually adopted at birth and didn't find out about it until, until the late twenties, my late twenties. And it was like, the family that I know is the Page family and 'cause that's-- Speaker 1: Well, tell us as much-- Speaker 2: --[who] I was raised with. Speaker 1: Well, I'm sorry. Well, tell us as much as you can about, you know, your natural mother and the mother that raised you. Speaker 2: Well, the Hoods were-- Speaker 1: Oh, well, first of all the names of, the name of your biological mother and the name of the mother that raised you? We'll get both their names. Speaker 2: Right, well, my biological mother was, was Helen, Helen Hood. And she was not married. She was about twenty years old when I was born. And back in those days, it wasn't that wonderful in proper families for a young mom to have a child out of wedlock. And at the same time, the Pages who were Clarence and Maggie Page were very good friends of theirs who for some reason were having trouble having children and were delighted to adopt me. And so I was adopted at birth when I was born in the Miami Valley Hospital in Dayton [Ohio]. And so I grew up with two families, but I didn't know that the Hoods were my actual family (laughter). It was one of those classic soap operas that happens in life. I didn't know the Hoods were my biological family. Speaker 1: But you knew the Hoods. Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I knew them very well. Every--they lived up in the Detroit [Michigan] area, and I had a lot of cousins up in Detroit, both biological and non (laughter). And we used to go up to Detroit just about every summer. And I would visit with them, and I visited with the Hoods. My grandmother, Ellen, who just passed here a few years ago at the age of 101, she--I always called her Aunt Ellen because I knew her as girlfriend of my mom. Well, my mom that I knew was not my biological mom. She turned out to be my adoptive mom, and Ellen turned out to be my biological grandmother. If you're thoroughly confused by now, hold on. It gets worse (laughter). No, it's just that I was-- Speaker 1: So your Aunt Ella, you said-- Speaker 2: Ellen. Speaker 1: Ellen. Speaker 2: Ellen Hood. Speaker 1: Ellen Hood. Speaker 2: Yeah, who I knew as Aunt Ellen, she was actually my grandmother. And-- Speaker 1: Are you related to the Hoods, to Rev. Hood in Detroit, and the-- Speaker 2: Not that I know of, no. Not that I know-- Speaker 1: The First Congregational Church was, the pastor is Rev. Hood. Speaker 2: Yeah, but Hood's a pretty common name among black folks. So as far as we know, they're not. My--now, that family, I mean my biological family actually hails back to Tennessee as far as I know. And I don't know a lot of relatives in that extended family. The Pages hail back to Alabama, and so it's a--I don't know how deeply to get into that family tree, but anyway (laughter), I'm always running into Hoods and Pages and we're trying to figure out if we're related or not 'cause there's a, as I say, there are a lot of us. Speaker 1: Okay, so you're saying that there's a possibility that the Hoods and the Pages are related? Or do you-- Speaker 2: No, but it's just that there are a lot of Hoods and Pages around in the African American community. I'll put it that way. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, but about your mother's family, your biological mother's family, they have roots in Tennessee-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --and you knew your grandmother growing up, Ellen Hood. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. They lived up, at that time, they lived up in Romulus, Michigan, which is right by where the airport is now. Speaker 1: Right, right. Speaker 2: I remember when the airport was built, back in the '60s [1960s], we had to stop talking every twenty minutes as some jet would come overhead (laughter). Story_ID: 37558 Speaker 1: Now, the mother that raised you, what is her name? Can you give us her full name? Speaker 2: That's Maggie Lee Williams, Maggie Lee Williams Page. Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: She would have been born in 1911. That's about as close as I can get it for you, in Carrollton, Alabama. Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what do you know about her side of the family? Speaker 2: Well, there's quite a, well, there's a quite a few of 'em. She came from, well, I have, what, about four aunts--she had about four sisters and one brother, Uncle Bubba who taught me how to milk a cow when I was seven [years old]. And the, let's see, and her parents' names don't come to mind right now. But the, but I know they were named Williams though. And my aunts and uncles produced a lot of cousins who are now scattered all over the globe. And they're the ones I really grew up with as far as, like Aunt Bessie had about thirteen kids. Aunt Annie had about seven. Aunt Josie only had one child who didn't survive. And, now, my mom only had me. And so I was--and on my dad's side, it was a similar kind of a situation where he had, where he had three brothers. Only one had survived long enough for me to remember him growing up, Uncle James. He had about seven kids and lived about two blocks away. So, me, being an only child, whenever things got boring at our house, I would just go over to visit my cousins 'cause it was always something going on over there. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Story_ID: 37559 Speaker 1: So did your mother [Maggie Lee Williams Page] go to school in Alabama or in Middletown [Ohio]? Speaker 2: My mother grew up in Alabama, mom and dad [Clarence Page] both did. And they came up North in the, what, the post World War I migration, really. My mom came North to work as a domestic. My dad came North to work in the factories. He, eventually, well, during the [Great] Depression, he worked all kinds of odd jobs. But then afterwards, he joined what was then the Wren Paper Company in Middletown, Ohio and was there until the great, the industrialization of America back in the '70s [1970s]. And my mom was working--well, during the Depression, my mom was working as a domestic for a wealthy family in Middletown. My dad was working odd jobs, including delivery for a restaurant and catering service. And he made a delivery to a party at these folks' mansion one day, came in the back door bringing in the groceries for this party and met my mom, my future mother. And he returned to the house a day or two later with some flowers for my future mom. And the folks who were the owners of the house, that family, the Solomons, they--(laughter), Mr. Solomon turned to his wife and he said, I think we just lost our little Maggie (laughter). And he was right because (laughter) my, my dad asked her, you know, eventually proposed to her, and they got married. And she moved out of the Solomons' house and into her own with my dad. Story_ID: 37560 Speaker 1: Well, those were the days of live-in maids. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: I guess the maids (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: She [Page's adoptive mother, Maggie Lee Williams Page] was not just a maid. She was a housekeeper, and she was a guardian--she was a, what, nanny for the kids who are older than me, of course, now. And I'll tell you, they were so--Mrs. Solomon and my mom were so close. They would make a great movie. I mean it's one of those classic stories of, you know, the wealthy white woman and the, and the black nanny who became such lifelong friends that--I'll never forget when my mother passed, I called Mrs. Solomon, and she just was, you talk about just broken up over it. And I, and like her daughter, Lynn, I remember when I was a kid, when I was like twelve [years old], Lynn came to me and took me over to Miami University there in Ohio where she was a student and showing me around. She said, you're going to college, aren't you, Clarence? You're going to college, aren't you? (laughter) She was treating me like a little brother (laughter). And it was, you know, I'll never forget. You know, I think this is something that so many of our young people don't know these days. But, you know, for our generation and the generation that was the offspring of the Great Migration who are more accustomed to have parents who worked for these wealthy white families and know about these personal connections. You know, people are starting to write nice novels and make movies about these kind of relationships now. And in the post-'60s [1960s], it seemed so cornball, but for those who've experienced them, you really realize the special affection you have for the extended families in these relationships. Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, did your mother, so what brought her to Middletown [Ohio]? Were other family members in Middletown? Speaker 2: No, my mom came, wound up in Middletown because the family she worked for wound up there. She actually went to Detroit [Michigan] first, and that's where she met the Solomons. And they hired her and then when they--Mr. Solomon got a job as, what, school superintendent, as I recall in Middletown. He was a respected educator. And that was the, let's see, trying to keep this straight. They were, mom came to Middletown with the Solomons. They got divorced, Mrs. Solomon married the Ricard (ph.) family. And the Ricards were actually the family that I knew better than the Solomons. But my mother always called her Mrs. Solomon to the end, even though all the time I was growing up, her name was Ricard. And her daughter--it was her daughter, Lynn Ricard who showed me around the campus there [Miami University of Ohio], back when I was twelve [years old]. And they're still good friends. They're good people, living up in Connecticut now. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. That's interesting. Story_ID: 37561 Speaker 1: Now, so did your mother [Page's adoptive mother, Maggie Lee Williams Page] continue to work for Mrs. Solomon after she was married, though she wasn't living in the--she didn't work there anymore? Speaker 2: No, she, after she was married, she stopped working for them on a regular basis and would come back once in a while like when they would have a party or something and they needed some help with, you know, serving--well, cooking and helping the guests. My mother loved cooking. And by the time she was, like six years old, living out in the country there in the red dirt hills of Alabama, they, my aunts and uncles say that she would steal--she got in trouble like when she was like six or seven [years old] by, you know, stealing pots and pans out of the kitchen and taking 'em out and pretending to be making dinner for her brothers and sisters. And when she--her dream was to have her own restaurant and catering service, which she did. As I was growing up, twice she had restaurants. Of course, as I've since learned, and we learned the hard way then, the restaurant business is probably the toughest business in the country (laughter). It's very hard to keep one opened. It's one thing to open up a restaurant, but to keep it opened, because you know, like one bad week can wipe out a month of revenue and that kind of thing. And so she--the first restaurant she opened lasted about a year. The second one lasted close to three years. But in any case, she was always, always cooking. And she did continue to have a catering service right till she died. And my dad [Clarence Page] helped her with that while he also, you know, worked full time at the factory. But it was a straight, five-day-a-week job for him. So that left nights and the weekends open to assist mom. And, of course, being the only child, I learned from about age twelve that the purpose of having children, when you have a family is so you've got free labor to support the family business (laughter). And so I worked for mom's restaurants and also helped her serve parties. But to answer your question, though, about did she continue to work for the family afterwards? Only on a part-time basis, but she had a strong social relationship with them. They always, she and Mrs. Solomon always exchanged gifts every Christmas. That [phone ringing] was just part of Christmas in our house. Story_ID: 37562 Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Page's adoptive mother, Maggie Lee Williams Page] have any stories about growing up in Alabama or living in Alabama that she shared with you over the years? [Phone ringing] Speaker 2: Let me think, you know, I tell you, the one story, and I can't remember who told me this initially, but I later got more confirmation of it. We had a postcard in our house of the County Courthouse where, in the county where my mother was born and grew up [Carrollton, Alabama]. And there was a legend about that courthouse. There had been a lynching there in the early 1900s, I guess it was. And a black man had been falsely accused of murder or rape or something and he was in that county jail at the courthouse. And there was great fury and outrage by the white population there. And there was, I don't know if it was a Ku Klux Klan rally or what, but there was a lynch mob formed. And they took him out of the jail and lynched him. And--I hope I'm getting all the details of this right, but after the lynching a shadow of the man appeared in the window of the jailhouse. People could see it in the moonlight (laughter). They could see this man. And there was this, there was this great guilt, you know, it was learned that the man wasn't guilty and he had been killed for a crime he didn't do. And this, people said, it must just be soot and dirt on the glass. They tried to clean it off, and they cleaned that glass to a sparkling sheen, and that face did not disappear. And according to the legend, people, they replaced the glass. And when the moon came back out, the face appeared once again. And I always wondered why we had that postcard of the--(laughter) how many people keep a postcard of their county (laughter), county courthouse in the house. But postcards of that house apparently sold very well. And we must remember, this was also an era in which postcards of lynchings sold very well too. There had been exhibitions of this sort of thing. But I never forgot that. I know me and another friend of mine, George Curry, a pretty well-known African American journalist, he was also from Alabama, revived memories of this with me. And we talk about how, you know, we ought to go and write a book about this. It'd be a great movie or whatever, you know. But I always remember that, though, 'cause it was one of those thing, for me, it's got this, you know, however, true, however much it's a product of mass hysteria or mass guilt, it blends in so well with African legends. You know, you go back to the kind of legends we brought with us from Africa and all, it all just meshes so well. It's just like--to me, it's a classic story that rose out of the collective consciousness of the South and African American culture. And so I always remember that. Story_ID: 37563 Speaker 1: And you haven't asked me about my dad [Page's adoptive father, Clarence H. Page], but he was from Elba, Alabama, and-(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Well, let's start with him now. Can you give us your father's--now, you've got, apparently, you've got two fathers too. Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't know about my biological father. That's still a mystery. And my grandmother [Ellen Hood; biological maternal grandmother] claimed to her dying day not to know who my biological father was. And I never was sure whether to believe her. My wife never has believed her (laughter), thought that, feels that, yeah, he's a, that's something that my grandmother must know who my biological is and just never wanted to tell me. Speaker 2: Did you have any inkling or any rumors about who it might be? Speaker 1: Not really. I, nothing to really follow up on. And to tell you the truth, I'm not one of those people who is going out of my way to find out 'cause--and I think it's because as a journalist, I've talked to too many people who did go searching for their fathers and were, and 99 percent of the time, disappointed, often shockingly so. So that I've gotten really, well, a combination of emotions about it. I would like to know, but I'm not going out of my way like a number of people have to hire detectives and go tracking down my dad. And it's a mix of emotions about that. Some of them, bitterness, yeah. I feel abandoned like [President] Barack Obama, you know, has written very eloquently about his relations with his father and all the conflicting emotions. And I have felt all of those and more. And so it's, I feel also that, you know, 'cause I didn't learn until I was twenry-seven [years old]. And I learned because by then I was a rising reporter at the 'Chicago Tribune'. I was getting my first overseas assignment to go to South Africa and what was then Rhodesia. And I didn't have a passport. And as I was going to get a passport, I realized that the birth certificate I had was not my original birth certificate, shades of the birther movement (laughter). And so I went and got my original birth certificate, and I wasn't allowed to see it because at that time, in the case in Ohio, if you were adopted as I was, at birth, with some kind of a seal on the thing, you know, that I was not allowed to see it. And I was not allowed it. I could pursue this again though in court or something and maybe curiosity will cause me to do that. But it's a, but in any case, that was how I found out. And then I confronted my adoptive parents, and finally got them to tell me the truth. And it was kind of a great relief on their part. But I felt too that, you know, that, you know, why hadn't they told me all those years. I think to some degree, they might have been worried that I was going to abandon them, that I would turn my back on them, and, you know, wanna be a Hood now. You know, you Pages were nice, but I want to be a Hood now. And, so I think out of loyalty to them, that's part of the reason why I haven't pursued it more as to who my biological father and his family might be. So it's, but yeah, basically, that's what it boils down to. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 37564 Speaker 1: Well, can you give us your father's [Page's adoptive father] full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: Clarence Hanibal Page, H-A-N-I-B-A-L, just one "n," he insisted, even though all the spellings I've seen of the original Hannibal had two. But-- Speaker 1: He has one "n"? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, he would spell it H-A-N-, let me think now, H-A-N-A-B-L-E. That was how he spelled it. Speaker 1: Is there a story behind that name? Speaker 2: Well, the, yeah, well, the story is that his father, Mitchell Page, liked the story of Hannibal, this man who went over the Alps, what, Hannibal was a Corsican, as I recall, who went over the Alps, took elephants over the Alps (laughter) to fight the Romans, and if I have the story correct now. It's been so many years since I've read that, but-- Speaker 1: Wow, he was from, not Corsica, but-- Speaker 2: Carthage, he was a Carthaginian. There we go. Speaker 1: Yeah, Carthaginian, yeah, North African, right? Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean years later, you know, in all the hubbub over black history, many stories about Hannibal being a black African, and this was, been disputed and all. I don't know if my grandfather had that in mind. I have no idea. My grandfather, Mitchell, died when I was, what, he died in about '56 [1956] when I was about nine years old. And I never got a chance to pursue why he was so fascinated by this story of Hannibal. But in any case, that was why he, my dad got that middle name. And then he had a, Uncle James, survived--well, was around during my growing up. He's the only uncle I knew on that side. But my-- Speaker 1: What's your father's date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Oh, he was born in 1911, in, let's see, March, in March 3rd, I believe, as I recall now. It's been a while. Speaker 1: And what part of Alabama was he-- Speaker 2: Elba. Speaker 1: Elba, okay. Speaker 2: He was born in Elba, and I think grew up more in Dothan [Alabama] which was also the home of his uncle, Mitch--not Mitchell, Monroe, Monroe Page. My grandfather was Mitchell. His brother, older brother was named Monroe, who was quite a big shot in Dothan. In fact, when he died--I later found an old newspaper clipping from the 'Dothan Eagle' when my great uncle, Monroe, died about 1970, '71 [1971]. The, the second paragraph in the obituary said, quoted somebody as saying, "Dothan's fabulous Negro is dead." He was known as the HNIC. Every community had one (laughter), you know, the Head Negro in Charge, the go-to guy. If you were black and needed something out of the system, somebody to represent you down at City Council or City Hall or make some connection with the powerful white folks in town or the other way around. Now, if you were a powerful white person who wanted to connect with the black community there, you went to Uncle Monroe (laughter), who we called Uncle Monroe in our family. He was a man who, as I understand the story around World War I, he went up to New Jersey from Alabama to make his fortune with the, in, what was the town right across from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], there in New Jersey, the Port. Speaker 1: Oh, Camden? Speaker 2: Camden, New Jersey, right, a big shipyard there, and a lot of jobs. And as the story goes, he went up to Camden, came back like a few months later with a suitcase full of cash and used it to open up a grocery store and buy a plot of land so that they could have a park for the Negroes in town who didn't have a park they could go to. It was called Page's Park, and you had Page's Market. And he apparently opened up a funeral home and other businesses and was quite a civic leader there. And I wish I had known him because he was a big name there, and a big part of Dothan's black history. Speaker 1: How do you spell the name of that town? Speaker 2: Dothan, D-O-T-H-A-N. It's a pretty large, fairly large and prominent Alabama town near the Florida border there. And he, and also there's apparently two streets, Monroe Street and Page Street because he was also a building contractor too (laughter) and built enough housing that a couple of streets were named--are named after him, which I have not seen, by the way. And I need to go down to Dothan. I've talked to some of my relatives down there on the phone. I've visited some who've, you know, come up here to visit. But apparently, there's a rich streak of Page history (laughter) down there that I really need to reconnect with. Story_ID: 37565 Speaker 1: So we were talking about your uncle [paternal grand-uncle, Monroe Page] in Dothan, Alabama who was the fabulous Negro-- Speaker 2: Negro (laughter). Speaker 1: --of Dothan. Okay, now that's quite a history that he has. And nobody really knows what he did to get the money in Camden [New Jersey]? Speaker 2: Well, I have not pursued that, but I--my father [Clarence H. Page] told me that story, that he came back with a suitcase full of cash and that also, this impressed people apparently enough that there was a surge in the black migration (laughter) between Dothan and Camden (laughter). I guess, apparently, a whole bunch of other young black men said, I'm going to New Jersey, you know, and, but that's the way the migration worked, you know, not just for us but for every immigrant ethnic group in this country. You know, they, you get some, what pilot worker bee, if you will, who finds that there is this hospitable community that's got some jobs. And then suddenly other people will immediately go there because they know that some of our people are there already. And that's kind of the way the migration worked. And this was--well, what was unusual here is that most Alabamians that I know of went straight North on the Baltimore and Ohio Rail Line. The migration tended to follow the rail lines. So that you wind up--like Ohio and Michigan have a disproportionate number of, you know, Alabama black folks, while Chicago's [Illinois] got all these black folks from Mississippi, St. Louis [Missouri], Arkansas, Louisiana. And here in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], folks come up from the Carolinas and all. You know, we tended to follow those rail lines. So that was, what was unusual there was that suddenly, you had apparently, a surge of Alabama folks who were going to New Jersey, thanks to Uncle Monroe. And again, according to legend (laughter). Story_ID: 37566 Speaker 1: All right, now, your father [Clarence H. Page] now, did he have any stories about growing up that he shared with you? Speaker 2: You know, my father, it's kind of poignant because my father had Alzheimer's [disease] in his last days. And so his short-term memory was just shot and it eroded rather rapidly, but he would babble on a lot about his early days because, you know, the old memories is what sticks around. And my father was always quite talkative. So, I just remember him talking a lot about, I mean the thing is, you, well, the Kurt Vonnegut line, he became "unstuck in time" because Alzheimer's does that to you. So you know, I'd walk in and say, hey, Pops, how you doing today? And he would start talking about, oh, we had a good day. Me and my brothers went out and played softball today, you know, 'cause to him it had just happened. But he would talk about it as if it just happened today and describe these vivid scenes there in the red clay, dirt of Alabama, there playing softball out there with his brothers and the other fellows and milking the cows and planting the gardens. It was, I get the feeling, it was a placid upbringing. I mean I just think about how, to me, you know, folks used to ask me if I ever think about writing a memoir. And I say my family is far too dull to write a memoir about. We had virtually no dysfunction. When I was growing up, we just didn't have any. It was boring. Dad worked, mom [Maggie Lee Williams Page] (laughter) cooked and worked. They got along amazingly well. They made me go to school every day, and we had this, what, they never divorced, hardly even argued. We went to church every Sunday. And let's see, what was the story, went to church all the time. You know, Monday night prayer meeting, Tuesday night Deacon's Club, Wednesday night (laughter), choir rehearsal, Thursday night, etc., etc. And it was only later, as I say I found out that I was adopted, and then I began to learn how much dysfunction had happened and that it had just been shielded from me. And, but in any case though, as far as my father's growing up, you know, born in 1911, the early days of the automobile and the consumer society that we know of in the 20th Century, he got to see very much of the century in his early days, like Booker T. Washington was still a very big presence, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was just getting started. And this was mostly in the background with my family 'cause they weren't political, which probably had something to do with why I did become so political (laughter) because it was my form of rebellion. My Uncle James was always the kind of guy who would talk about politics and argue about it, my father's youngest brother. My father was the oldest of the four. James was the youngest. And the two brothers in between were the scholars. And sadly died at early ages of natural causes, but they were both, well, there was a Mitchell, Jr. and Festus. And they were--I heard all these stories about them growing up about how smart they were. They were straight A students. And they were wanting to go to college, but the, what, either the [Great] Depression or other economic pressures prevented them from making it all the way through. And, but, no, I think, you know, as far as my family goes, they were, to me, I recall them as being in many ways indicative of American immigrant families. If you think about all the stories that are told about Ellis Island, black Americans, most of us didn't have, didn't go through, come through Ellis Island. But we came through train stations (laughter). You know, there are stories to tell about arriving at the Detroit [Michigan] Railroad station or Union Station or the, what, 11th Street Station in Chicago [Illinois] or was it, 18th Street Station. They are long torn down, but when you look at the pictures of the folks arriving there, and they look very much like the immigrants arriving at Ellis Island, except they're all black. And it's, my family came up, you know, they were from a dirt-poor agrarian family, after the boll weevil, and they all came up North to where the jobs were. And they didn't go to college, but they were determined their kids were gonna go to college, and that's what happened with me, were the first words I heard as a child. And most of my cousins all went to college and successfully became part of the new post-'60s [1960s] middle class. You know, we came of age right there in the '60s [1960s]. And I always remember my grandmother, Carrie Page, who was Mitchell's [paternal grandfather, Mitchell Page], what-well, Mitchell's wife and my father's stepmother, she was a school teacher. And she always told me, son, just prepare yourself because someday the doors of opportunity will open up, and when they do, you gotta be ready to step inside. And that meant a lot to me 'cause I wanted to be a journalist from the time I was in high school. I actually wanted to be a newspaper columnist, a profession that was thriving then and is a dinosaur now. But I wanted to be a newspaper columnist. There weren't, not only were there any black newspaper columnists in white newspapers, but they weren't hardly any black reporters until the early '60s [1960s]. Just a few were just getting hired here and there around the country. And I was, but I remember my grandmother's encouragement though. You know, the doors of opportunity are gonna open up. Story_ID: 37567 Speaker 1: Let me ask you this. Now, did your father get very much schooling in Alabama? Speaker 2: My father actually went to school--by the time my father went to high school, he was living in Middletown, Ohio. My grandfather, Mitchell, had come North--excuse me, and got a job at Armco Steel in Middletown, which was hiring a lot of folks then. And so he, with my father and his brothers, all came up from Alabama. So my father actually went to high school in Middletown and completed his high school diploma. But, and he got a job as a janitor, as I say, after the Depression there, at the paper mill and worked there until he retired in the '70s [1970s]. Speaker 1: Now, did your dad serve in World War II? Speaker 2: No, my dad missed that, but my Uncle James did. And my father, from what I understand--well, dad always said he was, he had aged out. I think he might have possibly washed out in the physical or something. But he was, but Uncle James did go into the [U.S.] Army and was an ambulance driver over in Europe during the war. And so I, when I was growing up, I'd always pump Uncle James for war stories, although he didn't wanna talk much about it. And, but he (laughter), but anyway, I wanted more, you know, all those GI Joe stories and all this. Story_ID: 37568 Speaker 1: Now, you told us how your parents [Page's adoptive parents Maggie Lee Williams Page and Clarence H. Page] met. And that's a good story, and did they tell you what they were thinking when they adopted you and what they were thinking about and why? Speaker 2: They, my mother, in particularly, was very outspoken and articulate on this. She was, I mean eloquent about it. She would just talk about she wanted a child of her own so much, and that I came along and that when she found out that Helen [Hood; Pages biological mother] was pregnant, she said, oh, we will give your baby a wonderful home. You know, we just--we would just love him or her to death, you know. And she did. I mean I was spoiled rotten growing up, no question about it. And it was, also my mother (laughter), my mother wanted a girl, really badly. And she accepted me (laughter), to say the least (laughter). When I say she wanted a girl, there's a photograph in our family album of me, before my first haircut, my mother went next door where the neighbors had a little girl about my age. And she borrowed a dress and hair ribbons and put, and tied my hair in ribbons and put me in this dress and took a picture of me with her in front of the house where they were living at that time. So my--well, it wasn't the first picture of me ever taken, but one of my early ones was me introduced to the world as a girl, you could say. How much of a psychological impact this had on me, I have no idea. But you look at the picture, and I don't look terribly happy (laughter) about this. My mom's got a big grin. I don't look that terribly happy about this, and I'm squinting into the sun (laughter). But I never forget that though. She always wanted a girl and never got that, but she was, she could not have been more happy with me. And I think that was probably the best, some of the best indication to me of how much she wanted a child and how important I was to her. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37569 Speaker 1: Now when you think about your parents' [Page's adoptive parents Maggie Lee Williams Page and Clarence H. Page] dispositions, their talents, their, the way they act in public, I mean who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Oh, I very much modeled myself after my dad, mostly subconsciously. But old timers say--well, even when I was a teenager, when dad and I would come walking down the street and people would say, ah, you walk just like your old man, you know. And I did, I just kinda had this same kind of (laughter), kind of a slow shuffling walk like him. And he, but he was very important to me, and I think because of the work ethic. He, my dad was not a big reader. Mom read the newspaper every day, and kept up on the news. Dad, dad kept up on the news mostly through radio or TV. Dad read the Bible, and he was head of the Deacon's Club at our church and so was his father. And I was destined to be a deacon and to be (laughter), if not a full-fledged preacher, neither of which I actually achieved. But--well, I wanna stick with my dad and not digress, but the pastor of the church wanted me to be a preacher. He's the one that really, I think got me started on talking. But my dad was very important, though, for the work ethic that he gave me 'cause I think it's important. I mean I took it for granted then. Nowadays, as I have done and more reporting on urban affairs and all, and just from day-to-day experience, you know, there's so many youngsters who grow up without dads now. And I think about what they're missing, not having that experience of dad coming home--and my dad didn't dress like "Father Knows Best." He was a factory worker. He came home in, in working-class clothes and scuffed up shoes and he, he smelled of the grease and the sweat of the family--excuse me of the factory. But, you know, when he came home, and I'd run up to him and give him a big hug, he smelled like dad. You know, that was the feeling of dad, and he'd worked hard all day. And so I just took it for granted that, yeah, I'm gonna work hard every day and take care of my family. And that is such an important lesson for, to be passed on. And being a father myself, I took too much of that for granted (laughter) and realize now, well, my son's twenty-one [years old] now, and so much of this, I have to teach verbally to him. But I think at the same time though, there's no question that, you know, the stuff he takes for granted, you know, of me coming home after a day's work at the office and all, he takes it for granted that he's going to work. What kind of work he does, that's up to him. But he, he's going to work. When he comes home and tells me he wants to be a professional poet, I have to kind of grit my teeth (laughter) and say, you sure you can make a good living at that (laughter). Living? We're talking about living. But, you know, these are, you know, you can work out the details verbally, but I think it's important to model to young people. That's one thing my dad taught me, that he was a--I feel like he didn't have a college degree or any of those other philosophical, those other intellectual merit points or documents-- Speaker 1: Credentials. Speaker 2: --and credentials. But nevertheless, there's no question that he lived a life of achievement. He went out in better shape than he came in and he left some important accomplishments behind and mostly important, he took care of his family and raised me with the right kind of values and also provided a leadership model for the other kids in our community and church. So all those kinds of things are very important to me now. Story_ID: 37570 Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you all live in--was there a black community in Middletown [Ohio] where people-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, sure, yeah. I mean it was-- Speaker 1: Did it have a name? Speaker 2: Middletown, yeah, well, we had a--Middletown is about 40, well 43, 44,000 people when I was growing up. I think it's smaller now. But it was a factory town that brought up a lot of black folks from, with the great migration, it also brought a lot of white workers from, particularly from Kentucky, Tennessee, as well as Hungary. It had a significant Hungarian immigrant community. And that town, that neighborhood, in those pre-PC days was called Hunky Town. And that was, a good friend of mine, classmate of mine, David Zabose (ph.) who's in Chicago [Illinois] as a cinematographer now, we were classmates and worked at the high school newspaper together. He was, his family was part of that Hungarian migration. And it was from him that I learned that Hunky was actually a derogatory term for Hungarians because I grew up with Hunky Town as the name of a black community because as the Hungarian immigrants moved on, black folks moved in. And there were two black neighborhoods in town, one called Hunky Town and one called Buck Town. Those were the two, well, yeah, those were the two really prominent black neighborhoods in town. Hardly any black folks didn't live in one or the other, although there was one--well, there was also Cloverdale or Cloverdell, which was another neighborhood right through, on the edge of Buck Town. And that was where the swimming pool was. So I guess you could say there were three black communities by name there. And Cloverdell also had the community center that Armco Steel built which was years was known as the Colored Center, Armco Colored Center. And it was listed in the phonebook like that (laughter) because it was, that center had been built with the idea of serving the black community there in town. There was a lot of segregation there as there was every place else in America. But unlike in the South, there weren't any signs. That was one of the rare instances where you could look in the phone and see "Colored." You could see segregation right there. Other than that, it was just known by word of mouth. There were certain restaurants that you could go and buy food for carryout, but you couldn't sit down and eat. One of my favorite hot dog restaurants there in town was like that. If me and my white friends happened to walk in there together, my white friends would be immediately seated while they would hand me my hot dog in a bag (laughter), you know. It was just known as part of the local etiquette. So-- Speaker 1: This is through high school? Speaker 2: This broke down in the early '60s [1960s], about the same time that Dr. King [Martin Luther King, Jr.] and others were getting their head beat down South and all and race was in the headlines. And we also had an active NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter in Middletown [Ohio] that was always fighting on many fronts, especially, right through the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s]. Sometimes they won, sometimes they lost. They had less success trying to desegregate the privately-owned businesses than the public facilities, like they always made sure that we didn't have very much segregation of our schools. Story_ID: 37571 Speaker 1: I should say that there was one black elementary school [in Middletown, Ohio]. It was Booker T. Washington School. That's where my grandmother taught. And by the time, what, I was around thirteen, fourteen [years old], around '60 [1960s], '61 [1961], they desegregated Booker T. Washington School too. They changed the name to, what, oh, Edison, Thomas Edison School. And it became an academy for students with special needs. So my grandmother was the only teacher that they let stay at Edison. All the other teachers, and they were all black, were scattered around to other schools around town so that they desegregated. That was the last bastion of segregation in our public schools. But to their credit, you know, Middletown always had, except for Edison or excuse me, except for Booker T. Washington, they had desegregated schools. So I always grew up with white kids. So I always knew--and it was only one Latino family that I can recall from my youth that I ever knew. And, but--and I should also add, in the late '60s [1960s], with the new immigration laws and all, Middletown became much more diverse with Hispanic and Asian families and all. But when I grew up, it was mostly blacks and whites. And, but my schools were always desegregated. I always went to school with white kids and black kids. And I'm so glad I did because I think I just gained by that exposure. When I moved to Chicago [Illinois] and knew a lot of black youngsters of my generation who had not grown up around white folks. White folks were still, I mean it was amazing to me, but so many of my friends, like, when they were in high school and even college, white folks were still kind of a curiosity to them (laughter). They were out there, but they had no personal relationships or connections. And they were a combination of what, bemused or intimidated or resentful or whatever, had all these different emotions about white folks 'cause they just never had a personal connection with any of them whereas I, from kindergarten on, had those kind of connections. So that was one thing that I felt was advantageous in Middletown for me. And it was also, the class divide wasn't as apparent either. But there was, as I say--one area of real contention that was probably the last segregation to fall, and that was the swimming pools (laughter). There were three public swimming pools in Middletown, and two for white folks and one for black folks. And there was no sign, but just try to get into the wrong pool, and you'll be told right away (laughter). And so that was the way segregation worked at my town. Speaker 2: Okay. Story_ID: 37572 Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question. What, can you describe your neighborhood and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? Speaker 2: My neighborhood [in Middletown, Ohio] was, well, bungalows. From what birth to about age twelve I lived that neighborhood that was called Honky Town. And that was pretty close to Armco Steel, but as I would learn years later, the prevailing winds blow from West to East, and so if you lived on the West side, which most black folks did, it was the older part of town, the smoke tended to blow away from your neighborhood towards where the wealthy people lived, up in the, what we called the highlands. So it was one of the class ironies (laughter) of Middletown when I was growing. So I always remember waking up in the morning and looking out towards the East and seeing the smoke rising and the sun coming up through the haze of the steel mills. And also, it was right across from Garfield Elementary School where I went to school. The steel mill was even more prominent in the view out the window. So that was a very important memory of mine growing up. And I was also, I also grew up in the Cold War, and we used to do duck and cover exercises in school. So I would go to bed at night with nightmares of the mushroom cloud over Armco Steel. That was a, an image imbedded in my mind growing up. And by the time I got to junior high school, we moved over, a little farther West, and over, over near the Miami River. And I went to junior high and high school from this much larger house where my mom [Maggie Lee Williams Page] had a restaurant, as I mentioned twice in my growing up years. And it was actually a house built as a funeral home, back in the Victorian era. And the first floor, which had been a funeral parlor for many years, became a restaurant under my family's ownership, and was, for many years, they served parties. The last time I looked, that house now has a barbershop in that space. So (laughter). Speaker 1: So it's still there. Speaker 2: It's still there. The house is still there. The lot next door that my father [Clarence H. Page] bought with great pride and sodded and turned into a lovely green yard has now been paved over and turned into a parking lot (laughter). But you can't go home again, right? But those are the sights and sounds that I grew up with. Story_ID: 37573 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you went to Garfield Elementary School [Middletown, Ohio]? Speaker 2: That's correct. Speaker 1: You started off there? Speaker 2: Yeah, James A. Garfield. Ohio was very proud of its presidents. Speaker 1: That's right. Now, Garfield School-- Speaker 2: I went to McKinley Junior High too (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, and Garfield was the oldest school in the black community in Dayton [Ohio] too-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --on the West side. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, that's right. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, Fifth Street. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: Ohioans are proud. Speaker 1: So, well, did you like school? Speaker 2: Uh, no, I don't recall liking school on the one hand. And on the other hand, if I didn't have it I was bored because what else was there to do. You know, and you, in the summertime, it was kind of--well, it was nice to, you know, go out to the parks. I mean there was not a lot to do. It was kind of a routine that you went to the parks or you went to the pool, or you joined Little League or you went to Fresh Air Camp or something or other. And it seemed to me like it was a nice place to grow up until we had visitors, say, from one of the Cincinnati [Ohio] or Dayton churches. And we'd hear the big city kids say, boy, there's nothing to do in this little town (laughter). We'd say well, there's (laughter), you know, it was like, I realized that if you didn't know people, then it was, yeah, a pretty boring place (laughter). But if you knew people it was okay 'cause that's kind of the way it was. But, yeah, I, you know, I don't recall liking school on the one hand 'cause it was pretty, too many stressful situations or being called on in class or having to deal with tests on the one hand. On the other hand, I've got so many great memories of friends and relationships. And one of the peculiarities, I thought about this a lot as I've been trying to explore how to educate kids better and what makes kids learn, and what don't they learn. And I remember that the teachers who other kids complained about for being so mean and demanding were the ones that I actually succeeded the most with. I remember, in particular, Mrs. Reed, in the third grade, my best year ever in school, I made straight As that year, with one B in math in the next to the last grading period. But other than that, I made straight As that year. And that also happened to be the year that our TV set broke, and remember, this is the 1950s when you had one TV set. And if it broke, then you had to call a person called a television repairman. This was a job title that is apparently now extinct as far as I know. But back then, TVs did break, and they had these hot tubes in the back. And the TV repairman would--I don't remember any repair women at that time, but anyway, the TV repairman would come to your house and look in the back and click his tongue and said [clicking sound], gotta take it to the shop. So your TV set would then roll out the door with the TV repairman and would disappear for a good six months before you saw it again (laughter). And that happened to us. So for a good six months, we had no TV in our house and it happened to coincide with the third grade. And with nothing else to do, I actually did my homework and I actually read the books Ms. Reed gave to us. And that resulted in me getting straight As all year. So I think it says something that's ironic now that I've done so much in television as I feel terribly guilty about how many other kids have I helped to undermine by steering them away from their homework and toward the TV set. But most of my viewership tends to be older anyway so I take some solace in that. But there's little question that there was this cutting tension between TV and school. But I do remember, that was good. I had some successes in school, and I endured the harassment of being called Brainiac, a genius, etc. Fortunately, I wore it as a mark of pride without being too snooty about it. I think that's the key for any kid to succeed in school academically and socially. Story_ID: 37574 Speaker 1: You're part of a TV generation, basically-- Speaker 2: Oh, definitely. Speaker 1: --where TV was a part of everyday life. Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely, I was part of the TV-- Speaker 1: So by 1953 or so-- Speaker 2: This would have been-- Speaker 1: --you got your first TV. Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm just thinking about how, well, I was born in 1947, and I was about five, five or six [years old] when we got our first TV. And I remember Walter Winchell giving the news, "Good Morning--or Good Evening, Mr. and Mrs. North America and all you ships at sea. Let's go to press." That's how he opened up his show. And he had a little sign, Gillette right there on the desk 'cause that was his sponsor. And it was John Cameron Swayze. I remember these early news people. I think they had an influence on me wanting to be a newsman later on. Speaker 1: Explain now, how many stations did you have? Speaker 2: Well, you had three networks in those days, and you know, public TV didn't come along until late '60s [1960s], thanks to LBJ [President Lyndon B. Johnson], but, yeah, you had the three networks. But that was plenty. Everybody watched the same shows. That's why our generation is so good at Trivial Pursuit. We can actually remember all the lyrics to the first two verses of the 'Flintstones' theme song and can you tell you who Lucy and Desi's next-door neighbors were, you know, Fred and Ethel and all that kind of thing because everybody, 90 percent, 85-90 percent of the people watched the same TV show at night. That is lost now in our society where we're much more culturally diverse, with all these choices we have. But, yeah, that was part of the cultural wallpaper of my life, if you will. And there was, yeah 'Super Circus', I (laughter), Mary Hartline, I remember because she was the blonde majorette on this show. And I think that was probably the first tingle of manhood that I recall in my life. When I was about age five or six, I was in love with Mary Hartline, and so was the whole generation. Years later at the tribute to one of my colleagues, found Mary Hartline. She was, the little woman who played her was living in Southern Illinois and was in her seventies, but she still got fan mail. And also, Mike Wallace, this is a bit of trivia for you, the famous Mike Wallace was an announcer on 'Super Circus'. And when I heard this, I know Mike Wallace. We were judges together at the time on this annual contest, "The Livingstons" for young journalists. And the next time I bumped into him when we were judging and all, I say, Mike, I heard a dirty little secret from your past. You were an announcer on Super Circus (laughter). And he, his face just opened up and he starts telling all these stories about Super Circus 'cause they did that show live from the Illinois Masonic Temple (laughter) downtown in Chicago [Illinois], and did that show live with elephants and lions and tigers on stage, doing their natural business. And one of the most amazing was when this elephant, right there in the spotlight, decided to relieve herself, right there on national TV, on the stage with the cameras rolling and all and Mike trying to keep his composure as the ringmaster. It just, those classic times. But I remember this so well from Washington, from home. I also remember the advertisements for Lesourdesville Lake which was a big amusement park between Middletown [Ohio] and Cincinnati [Ohio] at that time. And Uncle Al Lewis, he had the most popular kids' show on TV, there on Channel 9, I think it was. Speaker 1: This is the Sunshine Hydrox cookies. Speaker 2: Very good (laughter). See, those old memories come back. You see, it's the recent stuff that disappears. And Uncle Al, the kiddies pal, you know, I used to watch him every day, like Chicago kids grew up with Bozo, you know, that kind of thing. And I, Lesourdesville Lake was one of his sponsors. Speaker 1: Right. Story_ID: 37575 Speaker 1: I turned to my parents [Maggie Lee Williams Page and Clarence H. Page] and said, can we go to Lesourdesville Lake, can we? I was about five or six years old. And I'll never forget, my parents looking at each other, real downcast, you know, they were not happy at all. And mom looked at dad, dad looked at mom. And finally mom says, little colored kids can't go to Lesourdesville Lake. And I was just crushed. I said what, like it just can't be, you know, that Uncle Al would advertise a place that colored kids couldn't go to. I looked at the ads, and sure enough, I didn't see any colored kids on there. And years later, I was reading Dr. King's [Martin Luther King, Jr.] letter from Birmingham jail, and he was writing--he wrote that to, not to the conservative segregationists of Alabama, but to the liberal, the progressive white clergy of Alabama and Birmingham, who were saying, you know, go slow. Don't be so fast, you know, you have to be patient. And his theme was why we can't wait. And one of the reasons, he said, why we can't, he says, you know, just look in your daughter's eyes and see the heartbreak when she asks you, you know, why can't we go to Kiddieland, and you have to say because we're colored, you know, because, you know, a colored kid can't go to Kiddieland. It was almost exactly the way the scenario had happened in my own home. And I think about all the families--now, if there was anything in all of the, in all of the heartbreak and pain of segregation that hurt people the most, it was having to tell their kids about it. And I always think about this with slavery, that the, probably the biggest cruelty of American slavery was chattel slavery, that you were born into it. Even the Romans and (laughter) other forms of slavery around the planet. You weren't necessarily born into. You weren't necessarily a slave from birth, but in America, you were. And what was it like for slave families, for the parents to explain to their kids that you're somebody else's property here. And, you know, this is--I think, I can see where the fire came to motivate Dr. King and the other people, ordinary folks for the most part out there, going up against the system. And I could see where, you know, for my generation, being the TV generation, we were seeing more of the world than previous generations had ever seen as we were growing up. Speaker 2: Now, at the time, were you angry about that or confused or what? How did you feel about it? Speaker 1: My reaction was actually one of, I felt--it's interesting. Yeah, I was angry like any kid would be. I also felt pity for those white kids who were deprived of the joy of having my presence (laughter), playing with them because I had other white friends, as I say, and this is one of the advantages, you know, of growing up in a desegregated school system 'cause I had other white friends. We got along great, and still do. Some of them now, in this Facebook age, you know, we've reconnected by Facebook, I think all the way back to kindergarten, friends of mine. And we have a special bond. And I think about how, you know, how dare these people in Lesourdesville Lake, get in the way of these great relationships that could be happening. I really felt that way, and I also felt--I'd say it bothered me every day 'cause I thought about, you know, the snap judgments that people make about other people, just looking at them, and thinking about, you know, how could I get into Lesourdesville Lake, how could I, you know, whatever I would see a really light skinned black family, I would think, you know, are they light enough to get into Lesourdesville Lake (laughter), you know, that kind of thing, you know (laughter). And it was like, these were thoughts, you know, like I say, five, six, seven, eight years old, these thoughts were in my head every day. Story_ID: 37576 Speaker 1: And I mean I get cranky conservatives writing to me now saying, why do you write about race all the time, you know (laughter)? I'm saying, I don't write about race enough. What are you talking about? (laughter) I mean this is my perspective. So, you know, we're all shaped by our experiences, but I'll never forget. Now, one day in school, I must have been seven or eight, on a Monday, one of my white friends was talking about Lesourdesville Lake [Ohio]. He and his family had just gone the day before, and he just had the best time. And he was so excited about it. He just wanted to tell everybody about it, you know. And he said to me, oh, it was really great. Have you been over there? And I told him, I looked at him, like astonished. I said, colored kids can't go to Lesourdesville Lake. And he suddenly stopped and looked at me with astonishment. He said, what are you talking about? And I said, colored kids can't go to Lesourdesville Lake. He said, what, of course, they can. What do you mean? Why would anybody keep 'em out? And I said, they can? He said, well, why would anybody keep them out? And I said, well, have you seen any colored kids at Lesourdesville Lake? Well, now he stopped for a moment. He said, well, actually, no (laughter). It suddenly occurred to him that he hadn't seen any colored kids at Lesourdesville Lake. And he'd been there at least about half a dozen times. And that was so educational to me, 'cause like I said, I must have been seven or eight years old. But it occurred to me as much as I thought about Lesourdesville Lake every day, probably most white folks hadn't even noticed. You know, they don't notice when we are not there. They may notice when we are there, but they won't notice when we are not there. And I'm not saying that just white people are that way. This is human nature. This is the way people are, you know. Until--if there's something that doesn't affect you, why would you care about it until somebody brings it to your attention. So until I brought it to this young man's attention, it never occurred to him that maybe black folks were banned from going to this amusement park. So, that's something that has stuck with me over the years, as a journalist, because I realized that writing or reporting or making comments for a vast, diverse audience, people come to the--whatever subject you're writing about, people are coming to it with different levels of, of sophistication or knowledge about. And you're gonna have to try to pick them up, wherever they are and bring them to where you are as far as the information or the point of view that you're offering. And that's something that, it's been important for me to understand this too as the second wave of feminism came along in the late '60s [1960s]. But I learned, sometimes the hard way, (laughter) that women see the world a little differently than men do because they are restricted in a different--well, you know, just--for my wife, just going to her car and an empty garage late at night is a whole different experience for her than it is for me, the level of fear that she feels viscerally is very different than it is for me. You know, so I think, empathy, that's the word for it, you know, that I learned at a very early age how important empathy is, to see the world through other people's eyes. Story_ID: 37577 Speaker 1: That's a story, you know, that resonates with me because I grew up in the same area and had the same, similar experiences. Speaker 2: Yeah, we know you--what did you do? You grew up learning where you can go, Coney Island [New York], Lakeside, you know, those parks, Colored people could go there, you know. And everybody had a good time, but, you know, Lesourdesville [Ohio] was what was different. Now, Lesourdesville did open up when I was in high school. Again, early '60s [1960s]. That, you know, people talk about desegregating the South, black folks can remember, yeah, the North desegregated too at the same time because, you know, it was very hard for these folks in the North to maintain their segregation when people were getting their heads beat on TV every day and having dogs sicked on them. So there was a real cultural change that occurred at the same time across the country. Story_ID: 37578 Speaker 1: Okay, now, you said the school [Garfield Elementary School, Middletown, Ohio], now, you became a brainiack at least at a certain point-- Speaker 2: I got that reputation. Speaker 1: --when, okay. Speaker 2: And I think third grade was when it really happened. And that actually helped, I would say, with my attitude certainly. I had a positive mental attitude towards school which means a lot. Again, you take it for granted when you've got it, but when you don't have it, it's very hard to produce 'cause you feel like, you know, well, what's the use? Even if I take this book home and read it, I ain't gonna succeed anyway. And especially, you know, I feel badly about kids with learning disabilities. I mean I probably have ADD [Attention Deficit Disorder] myself. I got it from talking to a psychiatrist who specializes in this because I became very interested in it a few years ago because I seem to have the symptoms. And I think it's a great motivator for going into daily, daily journalism is perfect for people with ADD (laughter), 'cause we gotta focus right away on some brand new story and become an expert on it in hours, put out a story on deadline, and then once you turn it in, forget about it, you know, go home and we could come back the next day, whole new experience. And I think a lot of people, undiagnosed ADD, wind up in daily journalism because it's a path of least resistance. But, you know, for kids who do have serious learning disabilities, and we find now that there are so many kids who are not producing well in school, who have the disabilities. You know, if you have it and don't know it, you just think, well, maybe I'm just dumb. Maybe this just isn't for me, and so you don't even try. And that's the worst thing that could happen to a young person. So, yeah, I think it helped me to have that positive attitude. But I was still a, also a classic nerd in high school though. I, I had--there were girls who were friends. I never had a girlfriend. I-- Speaker 1: What was the like racial breakdown, say in Middletown High School, right? Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, I'd say-well, overall, what I started to say earlier, Middletown overall had about, around 43,000, plus or minus residents, out of which about 5,000 were black. So it may have been about one in eight. And that was true of the high school too, maybe a little higher percentage because we had one big public high school and there was one big Catholic high school in town. That was the one parochial school. And-- Speaker 1: Now, did you start high school, what? In 1960? Speaker 2: Well, let's see. I graduated in '65 [1965], so the Class of '65 [1965]. So I must have started-- Speaker 1: '61 [1961]. Speaker 2: --in '61 [1961], right, yeah, exactly. Story_ID: 37579 Speaker 1: Middletown's [Ohio] national fame at that time, other than Armco Steel,-- Speaker 2: Yeah, basketball. Speaker 1: --the biggest thing was basketball. Speaker 2: Definitely, basketball and also big in the hometown of people like the McGuire Sisters besides-- Speaker 1: Oh, that's right, the McGuire Sisters were from Middletown, right. Speaker 2: --Jerry Lucas. Speaker 1: Yeah, Jerry Lucas of basketball. Speaker 2: Basketball star. And who else? Now, we had--a few years back, they had--no, more than a few. It was about twenty years ago. 'Middletown Journal' did a picture page on Sunday, "Homes of Middletown's Rich and Famous," and they had the McGuire Sisters, the house that the McGuire Sisters grew up in and Jerry Lucas. And there was Van Gordon Sauter who was then the head of CBS News. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: And he was, his father was a Middletown fireman. And he's another OU [Ohio University] grad [graduate] too. I think about the class of '56 [1956] as I recall. And there was the, oh, what was his name, Verity, Charles Verity who was Secretary of Commerce under the first George Bush. And there was my house. And so (laughter) I said, so I'm one of Middletown's famous. I felt, I felt really humbled by that, you know, that suddenly now, my hometown is proud of me, which is, which I think is quite a, what, an obligation to carry? It's something I don't take lightly because it's sure better than your hometown being ashamed of you. And one thing about small towns, especially our close knit community, everybody knows everybody. People will talk about you. So it's better to have people say nice things than not so nice things. So I felt good about that. Story_ID: 37580 Speaker 1: Okay. But anyway, back to your first question, it must have been '61 [1961] when I started Middletown High [School, Middletown, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I'm thinking. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause then it would be '62 [1962], three, four--wait a minute. No, it must have been '62 [1962] cause it was a three-year program. I entered as a sophomore. It must have been the fall of '62 [1962] 'cause then, no, wait, in '63 [1963], '64 [1964], '65 [1965], yeah. That would be the right period 'cause we had a junior high system there. So the seventh, eighth and ninth grade were at McKinley [school]. Speaker 2: Oh, okay. So you were, you did ninth grade at McKinley. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Okay, McKinley, okay. Anything happen in junior high school that's worthy of noting here? Speaker 1: Well, I suppose the only real notable thing was a civics teacher, a very good civics teacher, Mr. Brooks, I forget his first name now, he was also the advisor to the student newspaper. This was in the ninth grade, and I must have hit him on a bad day 'cause I came to him in my jovial mood and say, "Hey, Mr. Brooks, you think there might be a slot on the student paper for me?" And he said, well, maybe when you get serious, Page (laughter). So he just totally rejected the notion that I had any future in journalism (laughter). So I think something in me motivated me to prove Mr. Brooks wrong (laughter). But when I got to high school, I got to say, Mrs. Mary Kendall, K-E-N-D-A-L-L, who was the advisor of the student newspaper, I went to her, volunteered for the paper. She was delighted to have me join. We had a student paper--our paper, 'The Middletonian' came out every other week, no, twice a month we came out with our newspaper. Mrs. Kendall was serious about journalism. She always wanted--I found out years later from her brother down in Kentucky where she grew up that she always wanted to be a reporter herself, but, you know, women just didn't have access to that job in her generation. So she became a teacher and promoted journalism. And she talked the administration even offering a journalism class at our high school. You could get a full credit hour for taking it and passing the journalism class. And Mrs. Kendall was the first one, after I'd written some stories to suggest that I might have a future in journalism. You know, and she asked me if I had ever thought about being a news person. And I kind of dismissed it at the time thinking, oh, Mrs. Kendall, she's always pushing journalism (laughter), you know. And but I kept it in mind, and she, on Career Day, she invited a reporter for the local paper to, a reporter from 'The Middletown Journal' to come and speak to us. And he answered all of my questions as to how you become a reporter, you know, and go to journalism school, etc. And I'd say that was the day when I really began to seriously think about it 'cause I was a junior by then. Now, this was just after, this would have been that year, what, '63 [1963], '64 [1964] when Dr. [Martin Luther] King had had his March on Washington-- Speaker 2: March on Washington. Speaker 1: --in August. And the four little girls were killed in the Birmingham [Alabama] church there in, was that September or October? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was in September. Speaker 1: September, yeah, September when that happened. Then you had John F. Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] was killed in November. And then the Beetles were on the Ed Sullivan Show in January. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And that was about the time when I was looking at all this, I saw, like when the Beatles were on the Ed Sullivan Show on Sunday night, on Monday morning in Middletown, every copy of 'Time', 'Newsweek' and 'Look Magazine' disappeared (laughter) because they all had the Beatles on the cover. They were all sold out before noon, all over town. You couldn't get 'em. And I remember this really struck me, and I, you know, with all this news going on and with the Civil Rights Movement and the changes in pop culture, the '60s [1960s] were starting to unfold. And I remember thinking, you know, what better way to be, to bear witness to all this, than to be a journalist, to be a reporter. And I wanted to be a columnist and all. And so that's when I really go serious about it, [and I decided I was going to go to college]. Story_ID: 37581 Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite columnist or writers in the news? Speaker 2: Actually, at that time, we had--well, I would say my favorite columnists were actually the show biz columnists like Walter Winchell, Herb Lyons, Herb Kane out of the 'San Francisco Chronicle'. The column, the gossip columnists at that time, I'd say, Ed Sullivan, for that matter. Speaker 1: Did you read that stuff in high school, in the paper? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, when I could get a hold of it 'cause I actually went to the local library, in fact, the Middletown Public Library. God bless the public library. When I was a kid, in those days before Google and the Internet and all, I would go to the public library--that's another place I would hang out, which shows you what a nerd I was in high school. But I'd go to the public library, and I'd get the 'New York Times' and the 'Washington Post' and the, other newspapers from around the country, 'Cleveland Plain Dealer', 'Chicago Tribune', and see what was going on in the world. And that was a big form of entertainment for me. And so again, you know, thinking back on it now, (laughter) I realize how boring it was. That's where I was when I heard that [President] John [F.] Kennedy was killed. It was a Friday afternoon. I was, it was during study hall time, a time when some of my fellow--I was a junior then, some of my fellow students would duck out of class and go to the local soda shop or later on in our senior year, some kids would even go all the way over to Oxford [Ohio] where Miami University was. And then they sold 3-2 beer to eighteen-year olds, and they would go and have a drink of beer and drive all the way back, just to, so they could do it, you know. This is the crazy stuff teenagers do which gets them killed. But in any case, here I was at the library, you know, Swinging Clarence. But I'll never forget that, you know, we had one of those classic old-school librarians who didn't let you talk above a low whisper, wanted the place quiet. But all of a sudden, here she was bringing out this portable radio to the front desk and plugging it in and turning it up to top volume. And me and everybody else knew something weird is going on 'cause she did not bring a radio out here and start making noise. And I'm hearing this guy reporting from Dallas [Texas] that the president has been shot. And it was just really, you know, everybody asks now, where were you when Kennedy was shot. I remember very well. I was at the library. I spent a lot of time there in those days. And so to me, to be a newspaper columnist, that was a way to be a celebrity by writing, that, and also to be able to bear witness and get a press pass and be able to go to these big events. Story_ID: 37582 Speaker 1: In '64 [1964], I watched the political conventions on TV. That was the first year that a black reporter reported the political conventions from--well, a black reporter reported the conventions on national television. Speaker 2: Who was the reporter? Speaker 1: His name was Bob Tague, T-A-G-U-E-- Speaker 2: Bob Tague, okay. Speaker 1: --with NBC. And Bob was actually the second black reporter, as I recall, to be hired by a network. I think the first was, well, it's either ABC or CBS. And now I have forgotten. It might have been Mel Good, but I'm not sure. I do remember like '63 [1963], '64 [1964], '65 [1965], each of the networks hired their first black reporter and only one black reporter (laughter), you know, and Tague was '64 [1964]. I remember that. And he later wrote a book about his experience as NBC's first black reporter. And he titled it "Dear Nigger" because that was the way a lot of the letters he got, the salutation on many of the letters he received. And, but that was inspirational to me, 'cause again, in the background, my grandmother saying, just prepare yourself 'cause some day the doors of opportunity will open up, and you gotta be ready to step inside it. Speaker 2: Do you remember the content of that convention in '64 [1964]? That was one of-- Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Speaker 2: --strangest conventions. Speaker 1: Well, that was a Democratic convention-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --which was--they were both strange 'cause the Republican convention was when, you know, Barry Goldwater got nominated and the conservatives booed Nelson Rockefeller off the stage virtually. And with the Democrats, it was, there was seating controversy 'cause you had, what, Fannie Lou Hammer and the Mississippi Freedom Democrat Party was fighting for seats, to be seated because blacks had been denied their voting rights in Mississippi. And they were contending, you know, that if black folks could (unclear) vote, we would be the delegation. And there was a big fight thrown into the hands of the Democratic Party leadership. And that was, so the thing about both these conventions is, there was news happening. It was something, you know, every day, you'd tune in to see what's gonna happen next. How are these controversies gonna be resolved. So it was all this drama, and I was watching Bob Tague and all the rest of 'em, these reporters had these big press passes around their necks. I said, that's what I wanna, I wanna be there. I want that big press pass around my neck and to be right in the middle of history as it happens. Little did I know that that was just about the last convention where real business took place on the floor of the convention. You know, after that, these--for both parties, they pretty much made up their minds before they ever got to the convention as to who the nominee was going to be, and outside of the police riot at the Chicago '68 [1968] Convention, there weren't that many surprises. Well, it was that, and it was also like '72 [1972], they--everything went long and McGovern didn't give his nomination speech till about three [o'clock] in the morning, you know, that kind of thing. So it became more and more orchestrated affairs after that. But I still go to those conventions whenever the convention's around, either hook or by crook, I get there with my press credentials because that was what I, that's kind of where I started in this business, and I still go 'cause it means a lot to me and to the other journalists and we try to make it mean something to people who are watching at home. Story_ID: 37583 Speaker 1: Now, this is an age when, and I remember this, that when the conventions came on television, they took all the television time. You couldn't watch--you only had two or three stations anyway-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah. Speaker 1: --and then you'd have to watch the convention on either channel. So people either didn't watch television, they turned it off in disgust and walked away or they watched. Speaker 2: Or they watched it. That's right. Speaker 1: Or they watched the convention. Speaker 2: That's right, and that's why-- Speaker 1: There was no alternative. You couldn't watch a cartoon network or MTV or-- Speaker 2: No, yeah, that's right, exactly. Speaker 1: If you were a kid even, you saw the convention if you turned on the TV. Speaker 2: We're still examining what difference that makes for our common culture in this country because when you did, when everybody did watch the same shows, you shared a common culture and a common perspective on things. You still had great diversity of views. You know, this, today's polarization is not new. In fact, we were in many ways more polarized in the '60s [1960s]. I mean we had riots, for Pete's sake, on the streets. You had, a lot of folks thought maybe the republic was coming apart at the seams and people may say that kind of thing dramatically today, but by comparison, we are a model of decorum (laughter). But it is true, though, that you did have just those three channels. So the media had a different role in society in those days. So today the, I would say our media is probably more democratized and you get all the advantages and the disadvantages of that, all the hazards of democratization 'cause some folks just don't deserve to have their hands on the media as far as I'm concerned. But I am not the judge of that. And it's a good thing (laughter) because you don't wanna have other people judging that for you. You know, part of freedom is having the freedom to be a fool if you so desire. But you need to, we needed to have an honest competition in the marketplace of ideas. And that means everybody gets the freedom to speak up and let the rest of the public decide. So it's a, that's the big difference between now and then, that you actually had a lot more central control over what people could see. And it was more difficult for the viewers to go out and find a diversity of information. Story_ID: 37584 Speaker 1: You were saying you remember Washington Convention in 1956. Now, you must have been-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, nine [years old]. Speaker 1: Nine. Speaker 2: I was nine, yeah, but, you know, I remember watching the Republican Convention, in particular, although I watched both of them. But I remember especially though because I knew who President [Dwight] Eisenhower was. Everybody knew who President Eisenhower was. Everybody knew he was the guy who was in charge of the country or he was the president. He was the top dog in the government, and, in fact, he was so revered at that time that I'd say, as a kid, when I was seven, eight, nine years old, I asked my parents [Maggie Lee Williams Page and Clarence H. Page], who's gonna be the next President Eisenhower, when this President Eisenhower is gone? I thought that was the title of the job (laughter), big President Eisenhower (laughter) or Ike. I like Ike. And it's an interesting period to look back to because, you know, after World War II which was a big reason why he was so popular, we think of Ike as being the non-political politician. In fact, he was very political. He was very clever in setting himself up to be nominated without having to go through the grueling torture of primaries in '52 [1952]. He kind of got himself anointed at that Republican Convention in '52 [1952] and all that. But, you know, it's interesting though 'cause that was the beginning of the media age. He was the first one to have televised commercials. And Adlai Stevenson disparaged the idea of being sold like a box of soap, as he put it, and you could see who won (laughter) in a very big way. And so, I remember in 1960, what, I think I was watching Ed Sullivan Show on a Sunday evening. And at the end of the show, they said, stay tuned for the first televised presidential debate. And I said, okay (laughter). And sure enough, there was [Richard] Nixon and [John F.] Kennedy in the first televised debate. And I, it was, well, I don't need to tell you about how important that night was for, that was the night when Kennedy turned the corner and began to take the lead from Nixon, which was, in the end, it was still an extremely close election. And, but the importance of TV as a determinate of our political leadership, as the defining factor in our politics, that was the beginning of a new era right there where it became really obvious to everybody how important TV was. And that was the beginning in many ways of the decline of the old precinct captain school of party politics and the beginning of the new show biz age, where TV became the most important precinct captain. And, and so I feel like I was right there at this defining moment and still an important thing in defining how I view the role of the media today. And when I look back, and I think of how much happened in the Civil Rights Movement from '60 [1960] to '65 [1965] and for that matter just what, before that, 1954, you had the Supreme Court, "Brown vs. Board" decision, '55 [1955] there was the killing of-- Speaker 1: Emmett Till. Speaker 2: I'm sorry, Emmitt Till, his death. And then the Montgomery Bus Boycotts, right after that. Speaker 1: Yeah, '56 [1956]. Speaker 2: And, right, the very next year. And then you had the Little Rock, and watching that on TV, that was the first time I saw young people--my parents had always told me, don't make waves, just go along, you know, and stay out of trouble. And I, here I'm seeing high school kids facing down the Arkansas National Guard just for the right to get an education in that high school right there. And then the next day, I turn on the tube, and here are, is--I think it was the 82nd or the 101st Airborne, Eisenhower sent in. He federalized the National Guard, made them go back to their barracks, and he brought in paratroopers who escorted the black students into the school. I think that was when I first became politicized (laughter). I could see the power of politics right there. And I was what, nine years old or a little older. I was about ten then, and I'm seeing the power of politics and President Eisenhower (laughter). He's the man that did, you know. And it was overnight. Boom, the walls of segregation come down. And then, you know, I'm watching the students in North Carolina at the sit-ins at the lunch counters, and then you're seeing--I watched the whole Civil Rights Movements unfolding right there on TV. And, you know, journalism was a way to be a part of that, to get out there and bear witness to and be part of delivering the message of the world to the viewers out there. So all this was happening in that period of time, and not to mention, Malcolm X came along. Story_ID: 37585 Speaker 1: Mike Wallace produced a documentary called "The Hate that Hate Produced." Speaker 2: Did you see that during that time, when it came out? Speaker 1: At the time it came out, I did, and I also have a copy of it. Now, Mike Wallace gave me a copy of it which I dubbed, and I gave him the original back because that was defining for me in two ways, not only as a piece of history, but also the story was brought to Mike Wallace by a black journalist named, oh, goodness-- Speaker 2: I know who you're-- Speaker 1: I'm just all of a sudden, Louis Lomax. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Louis Lomax, and he was impressive. It's all still up there. It's just that I got a lot more. It looks like a big overstuffed filing cabinet. It takes a while to thumb through it. But Louis Lomax, who was an important figure to me personally, who I never knew except through the media. I first saw him on the 'Jack Parr Show' when--he was the first guest--I used to love to watch late night, 'The Tonight Show' to young people out there, the Jack Parr Show after the news. I loved staying up late and watching that show. And he was the first colored person I saw guest on that show who didn't have a song, dance or comedy act. Instead, he came out and sat down on the couch and talked with Jack Parr just like the sophisticated white folks did. And this was very important to me because I wanted to say who is this colored man who gets to sit down with Jack Parr and talk. And it turned it was Louis Lomax. He had just gotten an exclusive interview with Fidel Castro, that 'Life Magazine' bought and ran. And I learned something from watching Louis Lomax. He had written for the black press and he also wrote for the white press. He'd been able to break through as a freelancer by cleverly going out and finding these stories that nobody else had gotten. And so they didn't care what color you were. All they wanted was the story. And that's how he broke into 'Life Magazine' and a number of other major journals. And he did the same thing with Mike Wallace, who at that time was at Channel 13, the public station on New York. He came to Mike Wallace who he did not know and he, Mike Wallace let him in. The receptionist calls, this is Mr. Lomax. He's got a story for you. And Lomax came in and he said to Mike Wallace, something like, would you be interested in a story--or how would you feel about a movement of colored people, they get together by the thousands under the leadership of an Islamic black man who doesn't like white people (laughter). That was kind of what he said, to give the elevator pitch to Mike Wallace who told me, he said, I, well, I decided I wanted to know more (laughter). And so he told him about Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam and describes all of this. And Wallace was very interested and wanted to do the story. And Lomax said, there's only one catch here. The Honorable Elijah Muhammad will only talk to Negro reporters. And so Louis Lomax was immediately hired (laughter) for this one assignment there at Channel 13. And Mike Wallace, to his credit, when you look at the program, you see he opens it up by telling you all this. This is, I think this was the only one of his series where he did that kind of thing. But in the intro, he says, I'd like you to meet a gentleman named Louis Lomax who came to me with this story. And he introduces you to Lomax and tells you this whole thing before the documentary begins. And it, this told me something, that even at that time when black journalists were not getting hired by the mainstream press, if I could go out and get the story, then I could break through. Story_ID: 37586 Speaker 1: And when I was a senior [at Middletown High School, Middletown, Ohio], I was seventeen years old, I got, my mother [Maggie Lee Williams Page] gave me a camera for my birthday, which is what I asked for, a 35 millimeter camera. And I-- Speaker 2: What did you get, what kind did you get? Speaker 1: I don't remember. It was an off brand. It was not like a Nikon or something. I couldn't afford that. It was some off brand Japanese camera. Speaker 2: Like the, they have like a-- Speaker 1: It was a single-lens reflex, if that's what you're asking technically. Speaker 2: Okay, that's (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, it was your classic single-lens reflex, just that the brand was not one to write home about. But it worked, and I went out and got, took pictures of--well, I went out looking for stories I thought would be of interest to the 'Middletown Journal', our local paper. And I did find this one rock band, these three kids, who, three white kids, who were like age, twelve, eleven, and six. The two older kids played guitar. The six-year old played the drums. And they were just cute as a button, and they would--and talented, kind of like little Osmonds, almost in their way without the choreography, but they would perform at local church socials and events there in Middletown, in the Middletown area. They were from Franklin which is like from a suburb of a suburb, you know. Franklin had about 5,000 people, and anyway, I said, oh, this is a picture story. So I went, and I took a picture of these kids, and I interviewed them and their mom. And I said, this is too big for the 'Journal'. I'm gonna go for the 'Enquirer'. And so I sent the 'Enquirer'--well, I probably called them first. I think I might have called them-- Speaker 2: 'Cincinnati Enquirer'. Speaker 1: 'Cincinnati Enquirer', yeah. Speaker 2: Not the 'National Enquirer' (laughter). Speaker 1: Thank you, yeah, or Philadelphia, but, yeah, 'Cincinnati Enquirer' which was, you know, the biggest paper in Southern Ohio, the tri-county area, I'm sorry, the tri-state area, as we say down there. And anyway, the 'Enquirer' bought the story and my role of film and sent me a check for $25.00. That was $10.00 for the story, $5.00 for each picture. And the check I Xeroxed and then cashed 'cause I wanted a keepsake, which I've since long lost. But they did a whole picture page of my story and my pictures, and then one of the DJs at WSAI Radio, there, the leading rock station in Cincinnati [Ohio], saw it, booked these kids to play warm up for the Mamas and the Papas at Cincinnati Gardens there in the summer of '65 [1965]. And meanwhile, I went off to college that fall. And one day the door (laughter), one day the door, we were--what were we watching, 'Johnny Carson Show', I think it was and all of a sudden they announced, coming up after this commercial, we got 'Terry and the Pirates', whatever they were calling themselves. And I stood up and I said, that's my band (laughter). Speaker 2: Was that Terry and Pirates that-- Speaker 1: It wasn't Terry and the Pirates. I cannot remember their real name, but it was something like that, you now. And I (laughter), that's my band. These guys said, what? I said, I discovered those kids. And they said, well, you should a got a piece of it, you know. At the time, they took off. They, they got a 45 rpm record out that was a moderate hit at the time. And they even got profiled in 'Time' magazine. There was, you know, a one-page feature in there. So they had their fifteen minutes, you know. But that was, like I say, I was seventeen years old, and I launched a rock band with one article and some pictures. So it was a--that was my first big experience in journalism, I'd say (laughter). Story_ID: 37587 Speaker 1: So when you were a senior in high school [Middletown High School, Middletown, Ohio], you knew you wanted to be a journalist? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I didn't ask you if you read, did your family read like the black news-- Speaker 2: Yeah, we got the 'Pittsburgh Courier'-- Speaker 1: Courier, okay. Speaker 2: --in fact. The 'Courier' used to be sold door-to-door by Muslims (laughter) there in Southern Ohio, you know, in the Miami Valley area. We used to get Muslims to come to the door and sell because they sold the 'Courier' because Elijah Muhammad's column appeared in the 'Pittsburgh Courier', and it was called "Muhammad Speaks" before he had his own newspaper. And after his newspaper came out, then the Muslims would come to the door selling both the 'Muhammad Speaks' and the 'Pittsburgh Courier'. But, yeah, that was--people talk about the good ol' days and the black community was so close knit. Yeah, that was part of our lives back then, getting the 'Courier' and down in Southern, Ohio. In Northern, Ohio, they'd read the 'Cleveland Call and Post' or Chicago, read the 'Defender' and so-- Speaker 1: 'Ebony' and 'Jet' [magazine]. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I can't leave out 'Ebony' and 'Jet', my goodness, speaking of the first flooders of manhood, for a generation of young men was that fold out there in 'Jet', you know, every week. But what's also amusing about 'Jet' was (unclear), you know, the last page in the magazine, every week would tell you, would give you a listing of all the colored people that are gonna be on TV and radio in the coming week. And they--good thing we had radio 'cause there weren't enough on TV to fill the whole page, and this is a little pocket-sized magazine. But, yeah, 'Ebony' and 'Jet' were very much a part of our lives. Story_ID: 37588 Speaker 1: And I could, we could talk a long time just about the influence of John Johnson [businessman and publisher. He was the founder of the Johnson Publishing Company] on my life for that matter, you know, considering how he had that presence with his publications there in my childhood. And then it was the 'Negro Digest' that became 'Black World' that was very important intellectual, black intellectual publication. And then, you know, when I got to meet John Johnson in the '70s [1970s] and the '80s [1980s], his lessons--he wrote a very good, underrated book once that, back in the '70s [1970s] that was, it was a memoir that, when I say underrated, it was the kind of book that shouldn't just be on the black history shelves. It should be taught at Harvard Business School because it's full of anecdotes about how he made it, beginning with how he decided to take the leap in what, 1948, I believe it was, of hocking his mother's furniture, (laughter) you know, borrowing against his mother's furniture to get $500.00 to start what was the 'Negro Digest' and how he talked--the most important aspect wasn't getting the publication printed, but getting the distributors to distribute it, to carry it on the newsstands and all. This was just unprecedented 'cause they just didn't carry black publications and all. And in Chicago [Illinois], it was the big name now, the big magazine distributor back then-- Speaker 2: I know who you're talking about. Speaker 1: --it, he personally talked to the man and persuaded him. Well, what he did was he, he used this one newsstand as a test of the power of this publication. He said, put it on this one newsstand, and let's see how fast it sells. And then he networked like crazy. Every black person he knew, he gave 'em--and I think it was .25 cents a copy, he gave, passed out quarters (laughter) and had them go and buy up every copy like in about two or three days. And so they decided, [Joseph] Levy, or Levy-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Levy. Speaker 1: Levy was the company. And they said, hey, this magazine moves pretty fast. So they carried the magazine, and so after priming the pump like that, he really was able to be, the kind of high-profile magazine that became a national publication and led to 'Ebony' and 'Jet'. He has lots of stories like that in this book, and it was really inspirational to me that, you know, he believed that problems are only opportunities in disguise. Look for the opportunity in it, you know. And that was, I'd say, a very important lesson for me. It's something I try to pass on to my son and I think that made a difference with my attitude 'cause I'd say, you know, John Johnson, he came from a, you know, raised by a single mom. They were on welfare part of the time, raised in segregated Arkansas and then up to segregated South Side of Chicago. But he made it, and, you know, if he can do it, I can too. And I think it's important for us to, you know, have that as encouraging notes in our lives. Story_ID: 37589 Speaker 1: Black media are interesting because you also had 'Sepia' which broke off from 'Ebony' was--I'm trying to remember the people who started that. As I recall, it was, you know, one or two black folks and a white journalist too, but they-'Ebony' was too mainstream. It was too, what, bourgeois we would say. Now, that John, and John Johnson made no apology for this. There was so much negative news about colored folks all over the place, he wanted a publication that accentuated the positive about the black community and our achievements and success. And so 'Sepia' was started to be more "in your face" political, as well as talking about successes, talking about, you know, the more complex relationships in the community. And that's okay. We need both publications in my view. There was no question about that, and there still isn't. Now, and this was a lesson for, I think, us African American journalists today, as we look at what is available out in the marketplace and what isn't. Some of our best publications crash and burn, economically because they, for one reason or another, just can't stay in business. And I think this is always our challenge, and, of course, it's not just true of black publications and it's also not just true of print, but also broadcast and the web is opening up a lot of new opportunities now, but it's still basically, fundamentally what I call the broccoli and ice cream decision. We're a daily business, and we have decisions to make as to what we're gonna present to the public. There's the news that they want, and there's the news that they need (laughter). That's the difference between the ice cream and the broccoli (laughter). So how do you present both to them because if you don't--if they don't know there's gonna be some ice cream in there, they ain't gonna eat the broccoli either (laughter). So that's, you know, those lessons came to me very early, long before the Internet came along. And I think they still guide a lot of the way I behave in this business and a lot of other people in the media behave as well. Story_ID: 37590 Speaker 1: How did you make the decision to go to Ohio University 'cause Miami [University, Oxford, Ohio] is close. That's the nearest state school, I guess. Speaker 2: And that's a good reason not to go there, when you're a seventeen, eighteen year old boy or girl who wants to break away from the family nest. Ohio U offered everything. It was close enough to home that I could still bring my laundry home with me if I wanted to but far enough away that my parents [Maggie Lee Williams Page and Clarence H. Page] weren't gonna come visit every weekend. And also, it was in the State of Ohio which meant it was a good land grant college which meant the, you know, very economical for us, got a lot for our money. And back then, I'm so old when I started there in '65 [1965], I think room, board and tuition was about $1,200 (laughter). It was a lot of money in those days 'cause one of my, Uncle James came out of the [U.S.] Army after World War II on the GI Bill and it was about $300 tuition, I think back then. Speaker 1: Did anybody else in the family go to OU [Ohio University]? Speaker 2: No, no, not in my family, but I had other people who influenced me. Jim Butch who was our speak and debate coach at Middletown High [School, Middletown, Ohio] was an OH alum and very proud of the green and white as we Bob Cats tend to be. And he used to talk about it all the time, and the best time in his life. And when I mentioned I was interested in journalism, he said, oh, Ohio U's got a great journalism school. And I thought, here, Mr. Butch again (laughter). It turned out they did, I mean the two best J-schools in the state were also two of the best in the country at the time there at Ohio U and at Ohio State. And I looked carefully in Ohio State [University], but I--they didn't offer as strong of a magazine phase as Ohio U did, and I was really interested in magazines. I wanted to be like Louis Lomax and write for 'Life Magazine' or 'Time' or 'Newsweek'. And, in any case, I, also Ohio U had a student newspaper that was independent, while the Ohio State 'Lantern' was a laboratory paper. So it was connected to the School of Journalism and was essentially run by the faculty and administration in that sense. And so I liked, the OU 'Post' was independent of the school academically, something that's been debated over the years as to whether that's good or bad. Al Schottelkotte, one of the greatest newsmen Cincinnati ever produced and evening anchor for decades, he was a proud OU grad and a trustee. And he and I had worked together briefly on Scripts Howard Literacy project and all, and we used to argue about this (laughter) all the time. Schottelkotte really thought the 'Post' would benefit from being a laboratory paper and that the school would benefit, etc., etc. And I said, and Al, it's better to be independent and it's better that these kids learn to sink or swim on their own just like we did and blah, blah, blah, you know, and so forth. Yeah, people go around and around on that, but I'll say that Ohio U was, what was great there and got--I mean it produced a lot of really good journalists, notable folks. I mean Matt Lauer, today on the 'Today Show' was one of the more famous, Joe Estherhaus (ph.), the screenwriter, before he turned to Hollywood was, he won the William Randolph Hearst Award, which was the highest award a college journalist could get and I think is still true, kind of the Pulitzer [Prize] of college journalism. And he became a start at 'Rolling Stone' [magazine] and other publications, 'Cleveland Plain Dealer', and, you know, numerous other folks, Leon Harris who's now a star on Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] local news. He used to be at CNN and other grads--I mean I can go on and on about our grads. Story_ID: 37591 Speaker 1: Did you know at the time about Van Gordon Sauter? Speaker 2: I did not at that time. I didn't-- Speaker 1: Here's a guy, the head of CBS news, you know, and-- Speaker 2: He wasn't the head then, at least not in the '60s [1960s]-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he-- Speaker 2: --still working his way up then. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, right. Speaker 2: But, no, I knew Van later when he was the news director at Channel 2 in Chicago [Illinois], BBM TV and later on when he went to the network, back to the network, and then became Paris [France] bureau chief. We bumped into each other in the middle of Africa on my first overseas assignment there, I was telling you before, after I got my passport (laughter) and all. And we wind up sitting across the aisle from each other on a British Airways 747 between Nairobi [Kenya] and Johannesburg [South Africa]. I'm looking across the aisle saying, Boy that guy sure looks like Van Gordon Sauter (laughter). We must have flown for about 500 miles before I got the nerve, "Excuse me, are you Van Gordon Sauter?" And before I could get the words out my mouth, he goes, oh, Clarence, what brings you this way, you know (laughter) as if we'd just seen each other last week. But that's the way overseas reporting works though. It's a tight community of correspondents, everybody knows everybody else. And you're always going to the same places 'cause wherever the big story is, that's where you go. Speaker 1: Here's another, Al Schottelkotte, I think was the only news, TV news anchor that had the news actually named after him. Speaker 2: That's true. Speaker 1: They called the news in Cincinnati, the Al Schottelkotte News. Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, that's right, 'cause it's, that--yeah, that's a good point 'cause for local news, that's very unusual. I mean networks were kind of a--and that was probably an outgrowth of the Walter Cronkite era when they used to, as well as the Huntley-Brinkley Report too-- Speaker 1: Maybe so. Speaker 2: --Chet Huntley and David Brinkley. Speaker 1: I can't think of any other city-- Speaker 2: But, yeah, for local news. Speaker 1: --the Al Shottelkotte News. Speaker 2: That was very true. That's a good point. I mean for those of us who grew up in those days, we remember the power and presence he had in that region. And I think that's probably--well, it's indicative too of how you didn't have that many other choices. Everybody did watch those three network stations. And that was even before the McNeil Lair news hour came along in the '70s [1970s]. So you didn't have the Public TV alternative yet [even] [simultaneous speaking]. Story_ID: 37592 Speaker 1: So, in Middletown [Ohio], this is just off the cuff, did you see mostly Cincinnati [Ohio] stations or rather than Dayton [Ohio]? Speaker 2: We got Cincinnati and Dayton equally. Speaker 1: Okay, so you saw Don Quinn (unclear) in Dayton and all that? Speaker 2: Yeah, the signals, yeah, well, we were well situated to get both signals equally. And that was interesting too. When you talk about markets, we had one radio station in town, WPFB 910 in the middle of your dial. That was their slogan. It probably still is. That, on the AM dial, and they, as I later learned, as I, years later learning about the broadcast industry, that was one of the most lucrative markets in the country for a radio station (laughter). And it's right there between these two big cities, and just almost, you know, as far as the signal goes, equal distance. And yet, it was not lucrative enough to be carved up by those big TV stations. And so you had the--it was great for this one station. And anybody else who might wanna come in with a second station, knew that they would kill the goose that laid the golden egg because it wasn't big enough for two stations, but it was just big enough to make one station very rich (laughter). So it was, so that was probably my first time on the air, I do believe, in fact, was--was a contestant in the Middletown, the Middletown Optimists Club Annual Speech Contest. And I--they used to play the results of that on the air, the top three winners. And we haven't talked about my stuttering, but I had a terrible stutter when I was a kid from about age seven all the way through public school and right into college. And I, one way of dealing with that besides having different therapists every year with the public, through the public schools, was to enter speech contests 'cause one thing about me and most other stutterers that I know, we love to talk (laughter). And so it makes our stuttering more obvious 'cause we're talking all the time or trying to. And I entered the Optimists Club Speech Contest, and I never would have done that. I gotta give Rev. Hans his props. When I was a kid, we had a preacher in our church, Rev. Roland F. Hans, H-A-N-S. You might say Hans, but he said Hans. And Rev. Hans was a very stately African American gentleman, who felt I had potential as a preacher. And so he got me started welcoming the visitors at our church when I was six years old. And I said, is he crazy? I'm gonna talk to the visitors. And I remember, so my stuttering really had to start when I was six 'cause I remember getting up in front of everybody and stuttering all the way through my little one-line greeting, you know, [stuttering] "We, we welcome you to, to Second Baptist Chur, Church." And everybody said, oh, isn't that cute, and they applauded and all. And I said, well, that's the last time they'll ask me to do that. And after it was finished, the Reverend said, I want you to do this for the next month while we're lining up some other kids to also join in. Said, the next mo-month [stuttering] (laughter). Story_ID: 37593 Speaker 1: Yeah, I just recently got the Achievement Award from the American Institute of Stuttering and--in New York. And the MC for the program was Emily Blunt, the actress who co-starred in 'The Devil Wear Prada' and some other hit movies here. And she had a terrible stutter. Like you, she all of a sudden started stuttering when she was about eight or nine or ten, and it just kind of came on. And she said, it was theater. She found that when she was playing a role, she didn't stutter. And to me, it's like a lot of people say, you know, when they--you know, Carly Simon, she'd been honored a few years ago, the first one of these awards. And she said, she discovered that when she sang, she didn't stutter. And you hear that a lot, you know. They say nobody stutters when they sing. And so, you know, it tells me that there's, it's a combination of, it's partly psychological, but it's partly neurological too that, because when you're acting, you're stepping outside yourself and becoming somebody else. And when you're singing, you are exercising a different complexity of nerves or whatever, you know, whatever mechanisms that we communicate with are different for singing than for speaking. And so it's like, I think, it is a mystery. Everybody stutters differently and on different occasions and this kind of thing. But that helped me a lot though 'cause I found that when, the more I spoke publicly, the more control I got over it. And it became really a paradox 'cause people--well, the quick story (laughter). I entered the Optimists Club speech contest in the ninth grade. And I, when we got to the contest, you had to give a five-minute speech on "Youth's Approach to World Resources", something like "world forces." That was the theme, and a five-minute speech. You had to memorize it and deliver. And I stuttered all the way through it. And I've still got the record of it. They cut a 75 rpm wax record, gave us each a copy of our speech. And Fred Ross, another wonderful man--this is one thing. When people talk about role models, now, Fred Ross was white, Mary Kendall was white, Mr. Brooks was white. I had all these white teachers and role models as well as black role models growing up. It didn't matter about the color. The important thing was did they care about me or not. Were they involved in my life. Fred Ross was my coach. He was a lawyer in town, and he's still a wonderful friend, calls me his protege, and I proudly take that title. He, (laughter) after I finished my speech, thinking once again I've just embarrassed, disgraced my speech coach and everybody, Fred comes over and says, "Well, when do you wanna start working on next year?" Okay (laughter). And we did, and in the meantime, I joined the school debate team and did some extemporaneous speaking as well on the forensic league circuit, even went up to your high school there (laughter), back at Roosevelt and other Dayton Shamanade and all these other Dayton [Ohio] and Cincinnati [Ohio] high schools, all the way up to Springfield, ooh, Springfield (laughter). And it was like, this was very important for me though. But anyway, the next year, I did reenter the contest. This time, delivered my speech flawlessly, except for right in the middle, I'd forgotten my next line, and I paused waiting for a line. And that was the only thing that separated me from the guy that won first place because when I finished my speech, the applause--'cause most of the people there had seen me the previous year and had been bracing themselves for another stuttering session. And when I delivered it without one stutter, they leaped out of their seats and gave me this standing ovation. And it was like they'd just seen the kind of miracle you make Walt Disney movies out of, you know. And it was like, when they (laughter), poor Bruce Dominick. He was my buddy who won the contest, also black. We were the only two black guys in the contest (laughter), and he had won the previous year. Bruce was excellent. He was just, just a fantastic speaker. And he had that [President] Barack Obama dramatic presence, you know. He could just really do it. And he, people almost booed, when they (laughter), when they gave him the award because they thought, you know, 'cause they had seen that Bruce was good the previous year and he's good again, but I'd made so much improvement, you know, that they really wanted to give it to me. It was like watching 'Dancing With the Stars'. But anyway, I was pleased that I'd come up there and gotten second prize with this. And I think, again, that, the weird thing was that I'd become very good then at public speaking, but I still stuttered talking one-on-one (laughter). And so, it took me a few more years before I mastered, you know, being able to be able to do the same techniques, whatever they are, in both. But it was all good experience. But I did a column on this recently and got lots of heartwarming notes from fellow stutters and sufferers (laughter) around the country, all with their own stories to tell that are very similar. And there's, but we got quite a roster of great and famous people, Winston Churchill, Marilyn Monroe, who also, when she sang, she didn't stutter. So she sang a lot, and the same thing with the acting. And John Updyke who wrote a brilliant essay on his stuttering, and another essay on his eczema and said, you know, his stuttering was like his eczema except he learned he could have a little more control over the stuttering, you know. But all of these things are very important for, you know, what, developing, some level of skills and being grateful for what you've been able to do. Story_ID: 37594 Speaker 1: Now, Ohio University. So you, Athens, Ohio, Eastern Ohio in the hills and near West Virginia. Speaker 2: Yeah, and Pennsylvania, yeah. Speaker 1: Pennsylvania, right. So you start there in the fall of 1965. Speaker 2: That's right, that's right. It was a, well, the first place I stopped was the (laughter), was I unpacked my bags and had shooed my parents [Maggie Lee Williams Page and Clarence H. Page], you know, get back into the station wagon and drive home, I went right over to the student newspaper office. And it was a Sunday afternoon, and there were a few people there. In fact, they were, what, the editor was having a meeting with some other folks. And I said, I'd like to volunteer to work for the paper. And he said, well, thank you very much, but we're not gonna be open till tomorrow for that so (laughter), you're welcome to come back. So I came back the next day, and I, and I stayed there ever since after that. I mean that was the most important thing to me, more important than the journalism school, which was a very good one and even better now, was the student newspaper 'cause I had learned in my high school experience that that's where you really learn the business, is writing for an audience. And you get that with a student paper. And I think, I was lucky here again now, you look around now, how many high schools have a student newspaper? You know, very few now. It's just incredible. And those that do are turning out some really good people. I know a couple of 'New York Times' people who went to a high school here in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia], up in the suburbs there that has turned out some very good students and others--well, anyway, Ohio U [University] was a great place for me to go to school 'cause it was both big enough to offer a lot, some really good faculty. At that time, it was about 15,000 enrollment. It was big enough to offer a lot of resources at an economical price providing a gateway for us 'cause most of us were first in our family to go to college. A lot of my classmates were from working class families, more from Cleveland [Ohio] than any place else, but from all over Ohio. And again, you know, there were some fine schools much closer to Cleveland, but they wanted to get away from home too. So that's why Ohio U was great (laughter) in that regard. It was a classic town versus (unclear) college town 'cause it was out there in the hills surrounding by Appalachia. And it was a, the college itself was bigger than the town, and we had very, well, we had, lots of people came to the college to visit. Story_ID: 37595 Speaker 1: I met Marshall McLuhan there [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio], Timothy Leary stands out. I interviewed the 'Grateful Dead' when they were only a couple of years old as a band, almost everybody from Motown. I interviewed Smokey Robinson and the 'Temptations'. Speaker 2: Were they around Athens for some reason or they-- Speaker 1: They were there to perform. Speaker 2: Oh, they came to perform on campus. Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, you know, this was before Rock and Roll and Rhythm and Blues got to be the mega billion buck (laughter) industry became, really the early '70s [1970s]. I'd say '70 [1970], '71 [1971]. So it became a big industry in the early '70s [1970s]. But in the '60s [1960s], it was still a cottage industry. It was just a step above the chitterling circuit. I mean the Grateful Dead blew into town on a Monday morning and spread the word, "We're gonna do an impromptu concert in your auditorium this evening, Memorial Auditorium." And they did. And they packed the place, a couple thousand people. But, you know, you could go to a concert--see, this is what I tell my son (laughter), and he can't believe it. You know, when the Beatles came to the U.S., you know, and played the Ed Sullivan Show, their first stop was Washington, D.C. They came on the train down from Washington to--I'm sorry from New York to Washington. And they played here at a concert where the ticket price was $5.00 (laughter). When they went on tour, they came to Cincinnati [Ohio], Crosley Field, $3.00 (laughter). This was in 1964, early '64 [1964]. You know, people saw the Beatles for $3.00. But remember, you can go to a movie then, a first-run movie, if it was a buck, that was a big movie, "Ten Commandments" or something, you know. And the concerts, concert economics were the same way. You know, we could book stars. In fact, that band I discovered that I wrote about in the 'Cincinnati Enquirer', the, when the--they were booked with the 'Mamas and the Papas' at the Cincinnati Gardens. The Mamas and the Papas liked them so much, they took 'em on tour with them, (laughter) and we booked them at Ohio U that next year. Or actually, it might have been the same year, either my freshman year or sophomore year, we booked the Mamas and the Papas and the band "Terry and Pirates", whatever the name was from my hometown (laughter) to play warm up for them at our campus. Now, we had--well, I also interviewed James Brown, Wilson Pickett, Frankie Valley with the Four Seasons, I interviewed him. And I came close to interviewing Diana Ross and the Supremes, but they were too snooty to talk to a college journalist. Story_ID: 37596 Speaker 1: But Bill Cosby sat down with me for forty-five minutes, and I've still got a picture of that (laughter), him and me backstage with our Afros. He was about thirty-five [years old] then, and I was about 21, 20, 21 and both with our Afros and all backstage. So when he came out a few years ago with his, you know, self help, bootstrap speeches and all, you know, I said, that's not new to me. He was telling me the same thing backstage back then. That's always been his attitude. And, because that was--and it was significant then. I was disappointed then because this was the Black Power era, and I had these stars coming to me on campus, outside of the Motown people. The Motown people were under very strict censorship barriers, imposed by Barry Gordy, but people like Wilson Pickett, James Brown, he was very outspoken, you know, about, you know, what we needed to do and as a community and taking advantage of opportunities and all that. But Cosby, I was disappointed that he was, he sounded like my parents [Maggie Lee Williams Page and Clarence H. Page] (laughter), you know, "Kids you've got a great opportunity here and, and don't let it go by," you know "study hard and get yourself a good education 'cause that's your opportunity in life." And I was thinking, well, he's no fun. He sounds like my mom and dad, you know. But now, now that I am a dad, it sounds really wise to me now all of a sudden, you know. And I think this is--but that was, you know, I was exposed to all these people there at Ohio U [University] and because of the student newspapers and because of the stature of that college. I had the world coming to me. At the same time, I didn't have the distractions that I might have if I had gone to a big urban campus, you know, University of Chicago or even Northwestern [University] or Columbia [University] or whatever. Those were other places that I thought about, where I'd like to go to school in. And also the academics because I was an Ohio resident, Ohio U almost had to take me. It was a, they didn't totally have to take me. I mean I didn't, I was not a consistent Honor Roll student. I barely got into the National Honor Society. But I was never that serious. Ever since Mrs. Reed in the third grade, it was all downhill for me academically, but I did have a high enough Gentleman's C, as they say (laughter) to get into Ohio U. Now, I'd have a hell of a hard time getting in with my grade point average, but luckily, I had the opportunity then. So when I've had a chance, I've given some money to the Urban Scholars Program at Ohio U [University] which is aimed at kids like me, po' but proud, and not academic geniuses, but showing some, you know, future potential. Story_ID: 37597 Speaker 1: What do you think it is about Ohio University [Athens, Ohio] that produces so many journalists that go on to professional careers? Speaker 2: I think a lot of it is really that stepping stone, that it does what land grant colleges were supposed to do, produce that middle class and leadership class for America out of the working class, the children of the working class. That is exactly how Ohio U [University] works. It, most of the students there are first or second in their family to go to college, and I'd say, you know, certainly the time I went there, most were first generation 'cause we were baby boomers, you know. Our parents fought in the War [World War II], and that kind of thing. And that was true of black as well as white students, and mostly came from the urban, industrial areas where people worked in the Ohio factories that aren't around anymore. And it's, it was a very different America, but that was the, you know, apex of the industrial America that we knew in the early part of the Twentieth Century. Speaker 1: How did the dynamic of that community, like you're surrounded by Appalachia as you say-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you know, how did that affect your college education? Speaker 2: Well, I think, well, for one thing it still affects the attractiveness to students of color. That's still a challenge. Now, maybe it was partly with that in mind that the trustees and others happened to choose the current president, who happens to be an African American, the first one in the history of the school. And-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Rod-- Speaker 2: Yeah-- Speaker 1: --Rod McDavis. Speaker 2: Yeah, thank you, Rod McDavis, who started at OU [Ohio University] about a year after I graduated, so there in the early '70s [1970s]. And he has, in fact, he started the Urban Scholars Program, in fact, to help inner-city kids really who it's aimed at, what we now call inner-city kids, who were students, mostly students of color from families that are disadvantaged economically, but they, these youngsters show some potential that makes them deserving of a chance 'cause tuition at Ohio U is now ten times what it was when I went there. It's around $12,000 now, something like that. And so, I think that's important for us now 'cause, you know, that was, back in those days, land grant colleges were providing that American dream that Abraham Lincoln had in mind. And as the economics have changed now, it's getting more and out of reach of the people who need help the most. But in any case, I think that location has effected its attractiveness to students of color, but the school itself, it's got a lot more students of color than it had when I went there. I think we, out of those 15,000, about 500 were black back then. And I'm not sure exactly what the numbers are now, but I think it's about four or five times that now. And it's a, still they could use more, but so could most of our (laughter) colleges here. The problem is not getting them in, but graduating them as well as other disadvantaged students. And also the gender gap is a real problem, and not just a Ohio U, but across the country, that the girls are doing better than ever. And that's wonderful, but why are the guys doing so badly. It's really remarkable how much more--well, how much higher the dropout rate or not even applying rate for guys compared to the women. And it's caused me to think now, a lot in this day and age when we've got more and more jobs that are sit-down office jobs that are better tuned to people who like to, you know, unlike me (laughter) who like to, are very well focused and patient and very serious about pleasing professors, etc. as opposed to people who like to work with their hands a lot. And I know, you know, friends of mine from J [journalism] School who decide to become photographers 'cause they like to work with their hands a lot and be able to work with the kind of hand-eye coordination jobs that you don't have as many of those anymore. That, you know, maybe we need to rethink our education system to provide more opportunities. I think of this every time I wanna hire a plumber or an electrician and see how much they're charging, not by the hour but by the fifteen minutes now and how many young people, male and female, would benefit from good technical training in those kind of jobs. Eric Hoffer always said that the mark of a country's productivity is not the factories, but its maintenance (laughter). It's one thing to invent something and to produce something, but keeping it running is where things fall apart for a lot of countries. You know, and this was true of Russia and a number of other industrial societies with central planning where they left out the maintenance part. And that's something we need to think about today. Now, I'm getting far afield, but you're talking to a pundit here, and my job is to ruminate and come up with new ideas and new conclusions. So that happens to me all the time here so forgive me. Story_ID: 37598 Speaker 1: All right, so Ohio University [Athens, Ohio], now, did you get involved--how was your social life at Ohio University? Speaker 2: Much better (laughter), much better than high school [Middletown High School, Middletown, Ohio]. I was born to go to college, I used to say (laughter). No, but this happens too. And happening on my son going off to college here, and it happens to kids that--you got to watch yourself that the social life doesn't become your main academic pursuit. And that, another reason why I love the newspaper because it combined both my academic, professional and social pursuits. So that worked out very well. I became too overzealous at first. I joined everything. I not only worked at the student paper, I also was a writer at the student radio station. I tried breaking at the TV station, and I got involved with debate and theater. I pledge Alpha Phi Alpha. I was doing all of this stuff, and then all of a sudden my grades, I looked up and realized my grades were going phish (downward sound), like that. And I quit everything almost overnight except for the newspaper and salvaged my grades. This is like my first--we were on the quarter system them, either quarter or semester. But it was a, anyway, my first semester there, I was, I salvaged my grades halfway through by quitting all these activities 'cause I was just enjoying the social life too much. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 37599 Speaker 1: Okay, so you had to kind of peel back some of your activities at OU [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio]. Speaker 2: Well, yeah, and I (laughter) had to be more serious about my classes and my, the student newspaper. But I think the big reason was that, being an only child, I was thrilled to have, to be living around other people my age, you know. It was like having 15,000 brothers and sisters all of a sudden, all fussing and feuding and everything else. I think that was what, I was just so excited. I was too excited about that. So, yeah, I pared down my social life and did much better. Speaker 1: Now, I take it that you all had the black fraternities and sororities on campus-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: So you had like the Alphas and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum, we had Alphas, Kappas and the Qs and AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority] and Delta Sigma Theta. Those were the big five. Speaker 1: Okay, and in those days, we were still "Negroes." We didn't turn "black" till '68 [1968], '69 [1969]. Speaker 2: Yeah, we were still, yeah, we turned Negro about '63 [1963], '64 [1964], in all the news coverage, you know. And then the Black Power Movement came along in '66 [1966], and--between '66 [1966] and '67 [1967], yeah, Negro-- Speaker 1: It really didn't catch until-- Speaker 2: --went out and black came in. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, it didn't, I know it couldn't go out in Ohio until about '69 [1969] or '70 [1970], you know, really. Speaker 2: It, that whole period from '66 [1966] to '69 [1969], 'cause I remember when I came to the 'Chicago Tribune' in June of '69 [1969], they had just, maybe six months earlier, the style book had changed where they were allowing black--the word "black" became preferred over Negro. But it still wasn't a bad word (laughter) like today. Now, you get in trouble, you say "Negro." All of a sudden, you know, Harry Reid, or what--other people get in trouble for saying Negro. I said, wait a minute, you know, give the guy a break, you know. The National Council of Negro Women is still very much in business as is the United Negro College Fund and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. They have not changed their names in spite of a lot of internal people for the last forty years have been trying to get 'em to change their names, but they haven't done it. Story_ID: 37600 Speaker 1: But in those days at OU [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio] before, was there any kind of a black student organization formed? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we were very much--Ohio U was always, and this is another thing which I certainly was not expecting when I went there. But it turned out, Ohio U, of all the state, land grant colleges in Ohio, was the most political in the late '60s [1960s]. We got a reputation to where the joke was, and still is, that as the university billed itself as the Harvard [University] on the Hocking, to the students, it was the Antioch [College] of Appalachia or the Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley] of the backwoods. And that was a very proud label for us. Us boomers still talk about that because we had--well, we were known for the campus riot usually around alcoholic beverages, St. Patrick's Day was a big favorite during my time 'cause our colors were green and white. And St. Paddy's weekend, all of the bars, of which there were many ringing in the campus, they served green beer, and they had early closings 'cause it is Ohio. And they (laughter), and people would come out in the streets, you know, and start whooping it up. And again, you've got a lot of testosterone and it was, and the backwoods and isolated and all that, so once and a while the whooping it up would get out of hand. But I would say, well, first of all, it was the Anti-War Movement [Vietnam War] showed itself on campus in my freshman year when General Maxwell Taylor came to campus. And the student radicals, there was a small, small SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] chapter of about two dozen members that decided to picket against the war. And this was, this had to be, I'm thinking, well, it was that winter of '65 [1965], '66 [1966]. And, you know, the war had just been escalated like earlier that year when the Marines landed in Da Nang. And they, the beginning of an anti-war movement, and you know what that's like. It' just, you had a couple of dozen people picketing out in front of Maxwell Taylor's appearance and about 2,000 people surrounding them, calling them Commi's [Communists] and yelling at 'em. In fact, Joe Estherhouse was the editor of the student paper. I never will forget. He wrote a column about it that just described the-- Speaker 1: Well, Maxwell Taylor was the General of-- Speaker 2: He was, yeah, I'm trying to remember his exact title, but he was-- Speaker 1: He was over in Vietnam. Speaker 2: Yeah, he was, and he was, actually, I think he was taking an ambassadorial post then, I believe, or, but he was a big name with the war anyhow. And so it was a--so that was cause for a demonstration. And that was in '65 [1965], '66 [1966]. By the time I was a senior, four years later, those numbers were reversed, where you would have, you know, an anti-war demonstration would bring 2,000 people out and you might have a couple dozen jeering at them. That's just how much things had changed between '65 [1965] and '69 [1969]. And so you had that movement. Story_ID: 37601 Speaker 1: You had, the Black Power Movement spawned a new, a couple of different black student organizations, different names, same people largely, but they, they got started on campus pushing for reforms like, well, on the more reasonable end, some black history and black culture or black studies classes. On the more extreme end, wanting to get an all black dormitory. We didn't even have enough black students (laughter) for an all-black dorm if we would have had one. You know, but there was that push, which was going on, on campuses across the country, and so that undercurrent was there. And I covered it as a student journalist and got a lot of pressure from my--and I was the only black reporter on the paper, as I say, through all four years. Occasionally, another black student would join the staff, but they didn't stay very long. And I think that's another subtext problem going on as far as I'm concerned on our campuses, that we have a lot of really good, talented, earnest, young, black journalists who don't find a place at the student newspaper, which is a shame because that's a place to get that valuable experience that we all need as journalists. Now, in the Internet age, things have changed a lot 'cause you can just go online now in so many ways and get started with your writing activities. But too often that involves more opinion than actual reporting. But I am happy to say that, what, about 15, 20 years after I graduated from OU, the "Post" had its first black editor (laughter), who--oh, he's gonna kill me, and I'm blanking on his name right now. But he later became editorial page editor at 'Cincinnati Enquirer'. And then I worked with him at the '[Chicago] Tribune'. And then he left journalism. The last time I talked to him he was an education project, but, Byron, Byron White. He was the first black editor of the paper, and which came about, actually, was it fifteen years later, 'cause it was about, had to be early '70s [1970s], I mean I'm sorry, late '70s [1970s] or early '80s [1980s], probably late '70s [1970s] sounds more like it. But in any case, the--most of our black students came from the cities in Ohio, Cincinnati, Toledo, Akron, Cleveland, and especially Cleveland, just like the white students. And they came mostly from urban areas and brought their urban sensibilities with them. And so the times were reflected on campus. Story_ID: 37602 Speaker 1: 1968, now, you're like, this is your last year [at Ohio University, Athens, Ohio], right? Speaker 2: No, I was, I mean [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed in April, so it was my junior year, the end of my junior year-- Speaker 1: Junior year, okay. Speaker 2: --when he was assassinated. Speaker 1: April 4th, 1968, what happened? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I was working in the student newspaper office, and we had a ticker tape, not a ticker tape, but a teletype, wire machine (laughter) which young folks don't know about. But, you know, it was an Associated Press wire machine that was constantly typing out bulletins and news reports. And when we heard over the radio that King [Martin Luther King, Jr.] had been shot, we, our staff, and other people who knew access to our office and knew that we had a wire machine all came to watch the wire because we wanted to know if he was dead or not, you know, what had happened and who did it and all this. And I remember that, and I sat down 'cause, I was immediately assigned to write the story. And I remember sitting down at my typewriter--we had typewriters back then (laughter) you know. And I, when I got the word that he was dead, I actually cried. I remember tears welling up in my eyes as I was typing. And it was very, so we got--it was very moving. And then we got word of riots breaking out in Cleveland [Ohio], District of Columbia, Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan], you name it. I mean, yeah, we'd already had escalating riots in the summer of '65 [1965] with Watts [Los Angeles, California]. And so it was just across the country this time. And it was, so, yeah, it was--and since most of our black students came from cities, we were calling people back at our hometowns to find out what was going on there. And we did not have a riot in Athens, but there was tremendously high emotions on all sides. And I know my white friends were saying, God, I hope he's not white, you know, the assassin 'cause it would just make things worse. And I'm thinking, you know, they sound like black folks, whenever something bad happens, we say, "please don't let 'em be black" whoever did it, you know. And there was, the next day, we had a big campus demonstration, a rally, a memorial to King to try to vent these emotions. And it was right there at the student union building which is where our student newspaper office was. And I remember this, just all the thoughts going through our heads. And some of the black students, just out of, out of rage and remorse, spontaneously decided to block traffic at Court and Union Street, right there in the middle of, the biggest intersection in Little Athens. And they decided to block traffic. And Jim Wayland, the Vice President of Student Affairs at the college had the good sense--and later the president at the college and a leader among university presidents, to get the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] to actually encourage scholarship among its student athletes. He, a very sensible guy, and very much into the student welfare, he went out in the middle of this demonstration, this is a graying, blonde-haired white man out in the middle of these black students, walks over to the leaders who he knew and very quietly says, "About how long do you all think you're gonna keep this up?" (laughter) And they looked at him, you know, they looked at each other and they said, well, about another half hour. And he said, okay (laughter) and so he told the cops, you know, just, well, give 'em thirty minutes and they'll be out. And so after thirty more minutes and they speechified to each other and all, they all got up and peacefully left. And it was, the traffic was back to normal again. And it's like, you know, that was--it shows you what can happen if you've got sensible people in charge of things as opposed to the insanity that happened that summer at the Democratic Convention when Daley [Richard J. Daley] just turns his police loose, you know. You have this craziness happens where people are getting beat up and all for nothing. So it's, so, yeah, we--that was what was, it was a good place to be, there at Ohio U. I mean a lot of colleges had a lot of things happening during the '60s [1960s], but I can't think of one where I'd rather have been 'cause it was really a unique experience in many ways. Story_ID: 37603 Speaker 1: Now, did you get the Black Studies programs and courses-- Speaker 2: We did. Speaker 1: --while you were there [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio]? Speaker 2: In fact, it was so, I'd say after [Dr. Martin Luther] King's death especially, there in '68 [1968] things swung to such a degree that we, everybody was trying to do everything all at once so there wasn't a lot of planning, and a good example was, I was asked to teach a course in the English Department on black literature, and I was not really qualified to be teaching black literature (laughter) at the college level. I did not have a college degree myself yet. It was like my last semester on campus. And I was, but the fact was, I was--like I said, I wasn't qualified to be teaching. But I was better read in black literature than almost anybody else around 'cause it was just that they didn't have enough black faculty there. And they were embarrassed-- Speaker 1: Did you feel obligated to do that, I mean did-- Speaker 2: They felt-- Speaker 1: --you feel obligated yourself to learn about your own history and culture? Speaker 2: Oh, sure (laughter), absolutely, yeah, yeah. No, I mean I was humbled they asked me to do it, and I think, I think they really asked me, as far as I'm concerned, you know, more from my celebrity value, if you will, 'cause by then I was, I had a column in the student newspaper. And I was well known. And so all those things. I think they were so desperate, they were looking for people who could teach black lit. And so they asked me if I would teach a course. And so I did. Story_ID: 37604 Speaker 1: At what time--I've read that you were profoundly affected by the auto biography of Malcolm X. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was, well, it came out in paperback-- Speaker 1: He (unclear) (simultaneous) around 1966 or seven [1967]-- Speaker 2: --which would have been, yeah, well, I'm thinking it came out in paperback which would have been summer of '66 [1966], I do believe 'cause I remember back then before I had a car, I used to take the Greyhound over to campus and back. And I bought, when it came out in paperback, I picked up a copy, and I read the first page, and I said, I gotta have this book. And I bought it. And I remember reading it on the bus on the way back to campus, about a three, four hour ride. And it seemed life changing (laughter). I mean it was like, at that time--I must have been about nineteen [years old], at that time, it just seemed life changing. I had never read a book that, on so many levels, had such an impact on me. I identified with this character, this man. I also understood him in a new way. I didn't know much about Malcolm X except the news coverage, except one night, I'm happy to say, I saw him on live TV. It was a late-night show called the Les Crane Show. Do you remember that? Les Crane had all kinds of off-beat guests. He had Bob Dylan on one night. This was before Dylan was a superstar. He had Odetta was sitting in the audience there when Dylan was on stage. And he had, I remember one night, he says after this break, Malcolm X. I said, what? (laughter). Said I guess I'm staying up, you know. And there he was. And at that time, Malcolm X had this reputation for being this guy who hated white people and a maniac and all. He came out there. I never saw a guy with so much magnetism and who radiated such intelligence, and at the same time was so engaging, quite the opposite of being this off-putting, angry militant and all. He's sitting down and it was Les and Malcolm and on a first-name basis, the two of them talking, but very candidly talking about all the BS going in the world, politically and what needs to be done about it and all. At that time--I'm trying to remember now if this was after his break--I think he had broken with Elijah Muhammad and was at that point, engaged in his Pan-African Movement, 'cause I was, I remember being very engaged and attracted to what he was saying. I was saying, God, this is brilliant. Why aren't we hearing this from more people and all? And then, what, like the next year, he was killed, I believe. As I recall, it was January, February of '65 [1965], wasn't it-- Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: --when he was assassinated there at the Audubon Theater. And it was a, I said, boy, this, you know, what a loss. And if he and King could get together, you know, because they were kind of moving in, you know, in the same kind of directions. And so that was very profound, and so when the book was out in paperwork, and I could afford to buy it, and I think it was maybe .75 cents back then, I think, it was, it had a big change on me. And I think it really just expanded and filled in the blanks on those initial feeling I had about him when I saw him on TV. And, and it also gave me this, what, Pilgrim's Progress narrative that it was a lot like my own, only with a lot deeper downs and bigger ups, you know, 'cause here was a guy, too, who had come out of the Midwest from Nebraska for Pete's sake. You know, I thought Middletown, Ohio was Hicksville. I was a big city sophisticate compared to where he came from. Then he goes from Nebraska to small-town Michigan, then to Detroit [Michigan]. And along the way, he too, about the same age I had a teacher telling me that I couldn't be a journalist, he had a teacher--when he told the teacher that he was interested in being a carpenter, he says, you think that's a realistic goal for a nigger, you know. And, you know, having these people discouraging you, but you persevere partly to prove 'em wrong, you know. And he, his incredible journey through the underclass, the social underclass, the criminal underclass as Detroit Red, etc., etc. And all of the stories and lessons that Spike Lee just scratches the surface of, even in a three-hour extravaganza movie. It's really, yeah, but that book had, had a big impact on me. And it's one that I gingerly passed on to my own son 'cause, I mean, you know, to an adolescent and the kiss of death is to have something recommended to them by their parents. But it's a, I don't see it having the same impact on him, but who knows. It's--a lot of things have an impact on him 'cause he's at that impressionable age. But I think the story of Malcolm X still offers a lot for people, and I, I've heard it's a perennial, what, most read book in prisons. (laughter) Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: I can see why, you know, 'cause they think about, for people who are already shut down and locked up in life, here is a, like a "Bird Man of Alcatraz." You can feel kind of the, there's a certain liberating presence in that book. Story_ID: 37605 Speaker 1: Now, what did your prospects look like in your senior year at OU [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio]? Did you think about going to graduate school? Did you think about getting a job? What were your-- Speaker 2: We must remember, I was worried about getting drafted too (laughter). Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. They had a draft lottery system and that was-- Speaker 2: No, they didn't have a lottery yet. They didn't pass the lottery until summer of '69 [1969]-- Speaker 1: You're right. Speaker 2: As it happened, I was, when they pulled the first lottery numbers, I was in my second week of basic training in Fort Dix, New Jersey. But I'm getting ahead of the story, but I had, all through college, I was worried about getting drafted. Every single day it was on my mind as I'm sure every other male, eligible male on campus, it was on his mind. Speaker 1: Now, how did you--what was your position on the war in those days? How did you feel about it? Speaker 2: I'm trying to think of where it shifted 'cause at first I favored the war--well, I shifted early because of being a journalist as I was talking with student activists who knew a lot more about the war than I did on both sides. In fact, I remember one turning point in particular, I had done a story about our anti-war movement on campus. And in the article, the story itself, I had, I'd ended off, I can't remember what the exact line was, but I remember, it was something in regard to people who were, who supported the war were having a demonstration. And I referred to it, to them, as students who wanted to show their patriotism. And it got into print like that. And we got complaints from students and faculty who were against the war, that, saying don't imply that we're not patriotic too. And so Joanie Hartman who lives here in the Washington [District of Columbia] area now, she was the feature editor of the paper at that time, she asked me to go, she assigned me to go and do a story on that subject, you know, to talk to the anti-war activists about how they were patriotic too. And I'd say, that was one important turning point for me personally, 'cause coming, you know, a kid from Middletown, Ohio--that's John Boehner's district for Heaven's sake, you know, the Republican leader of the House [of Representative] now. It was always a conservative district. And I grew up in that kind of conservative culture where the idea of anti-war demonstrators was next to Marxism itself (laughter). And so, but my university experience was very broadening for me, and it helped me to be able to look at the world in a more even-handed way. But I have not been, since high school, I have not been a fanatic to one side or the other. I think I appreciate the distance that journalism provides, and along with the gospel according to the old and now sainted Chicago City News Bureau, "If your mama says she loves you, check it out." That is a very important working slogan for journalists, and I think a nice little slogan in life (laughter), to have a healthy skepticism about everybody that comes along with a package that sounds too attractive because nobody or, and no idea is perfect. But I'd say that was a big shift for me as far as the war itself. I became more questioning of it, and it was not overnight, but I became more questioning, and I felt free to question the war, knowing I could question it without being unpatriotic. Speaker 1: When you look back on it, did black people tend--black people, I suppose, would probably be ahead of white people in thinking about civil rights in those days-- Speaker 2: Sure. Speaker 1: --but thinking about the war in Vietnam, we probably were not thinking the same, I mean is that accurate, pretty much? Speaker 2: Yeah, I think the real change came around the Tet Offensive, you know, early '68 [1968] when everything kind of just started shifting against the war. You know, I see a bigger change when McCarthy, Senator Eugene McCarthy, did he win the New Hampshire primary? No, if he actually won New Hampshire or if he just almost won it, and that was close enough, but I know he did so well there though that it caused [President] Lyndon Johnson to think about not running again. And he decided he wouldn't run again. And he got up and announced he wasn't gonna run again. And I remember we came out, we saw his speech in the student union building, and us guys especially, came running out onto the street laughing, whooping it up, you know, the war is over, I'm not gonna get drafted. I'm gonna live, you know (laughter). And, and, you know, instead of that, we thought the war was gonna maybe end in about ten days after that. Well, instead, you know, Dr. [Martin Luther] King got killed, Bobby Kennedy got killed, the Democratic Convention that summer, we had riots, we had Richard Nixon won, and I got drafted a year later, you know. It's like, but that was a, you know, early '68 [1968] was when things were really turning sour. And that was after we had escalation, after escalation. Story_ID: 37606 Speaker 1: So, when you graduated then-- Speaker 2: '69 [1969], yeah. Speaker 1: '69 [1969], then what did you do immediately? Did you go right into-- Speaker 2: Oh, I got a job offer from the 'Chicago Tribune'. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I had five job offers. (laughter) You know, my grandmother, you know, she was right, you know. I mean I had five job offers. I, and because they were looking for African American journalists now because--and photographers or reporters and photographers. And that's why-- Speaker 1: Now, this is right after the riots and-- Speaker 2: Well, this is why I say the big affirmative action program for black journalists was the riots 'cause, and there were over 400 riots in this country between '65 [1965] and '69 [1969]. And it was really intense. And there was, and most newsrooms had none or one black journalist and most of 'em had none. And it was a, so, yeah, there was suddenly--well, I remember one of the offers came from Associated Press. The head of Associated Press at that time, West Gallagher, was the last name? Gosh, I'm blanking on his name right now, a famous man. He was the head of AP came to our college during Communications Week. And he knew our dean of communications well, and as soon as they shook hands and said hello, he says, "Got any promising Negro students here right now?" (laughter) Or any promising black journalism majors, he's quoted as saying. And it was like "Clarence," anybody know where Clarence is, you know (laughter). And I, honest to gosh, I, I arrived at the dinner that evening. He was gonna speak. As soon as I walked in the door, one of my journalism teachers, I think it was Ralph Izzard, who's still a friend, he came running over and said, "Clarence, West Gallagher wants to talk to 'you'." (Laughter) He's, he only wants to talk to you. And I, and then rushed me in to meet him, and he asked me, you know, if I'd be interested in working for the AP (laughter), and I said, I said, sure, I'm interested. At that time, I already had an offer from the 'Tribune', from 'Cleveland Plain Dealer' and the, oh, 'Dayton General Herald' where I'd interned the previous summer. And I believe the 'Pittsburgh Press' as I recall, oh, I'm sorry, Buffalo, 'Buffalo Evening News' or 'Buffalo News Gazette', the other paper in town, an offer from them. And also Columbia [University]. They were starting the Minority Journalism Program that they were--and they'd sent me an invitation to come to that program as well. And I, I decided to go with the 'Chicago Tribune', but it was a, and because I wanted to go to the biggest city (laughter). And I was out to be a big city boy now, and that was how I came to the 'Tribune'. I thought I'd be there two or three years and move on. That was 1969, so about forty-two years now. Story_ID: 37607 Speaker 1: So you get, that's your first job and you're there forty-two years. Speaker 2: I'm sorry? Speaker 1: It's your first job and you stay there forty-two years. Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah, right, right, off and on. I only left when I got drafted six months later and came back. And then in 1980, I went to WBBM-TV, and I worked in television for four years. And then '84 [1984], I was invited back to the 'Tribune' to be a pundit. And I became a editorial writer and columnist. So, and I've been there ever since. Speaker 1: So, just kind of, what was the lay of the land in Chicago [Illinois]? You had more than--it's what, three or four papers? Speaker 2: Four papers at that time. At the time I came to work for the 'Tribune', yeah, in '69 [1969] we had the 'Chicago Tribune' and the "Sun-Times" in the morning and in the afternoon, there was the 'Daily News' that was owned by Fields, you know, the same as the 'Sun-Times' and the 'Chicago Today', which the Tribune Company had bought, an old Hearst paper, used to be the 'American' and old timers were still calling it the 'American' like old timers still refer to the Willis Tower as the Sears, old timers like me (laughter). And it had just started to become the 'Chicago Today' earlier that year. And evening papers and, well, like all papers, were already in decline. TV was gaining audience, newspapers were losing. So this new chaos caused by the Internet is not new to old timers like me. One of my colleagues says, my entire career has been one of managing decline, and this has been my entire career. That's why I say, my early dreams of being a newspaper columnist are (laughter) like a dinosaur career now. Speaker 1: So those were the four mainstream papers-- Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum. Speaker 1: --white-owned, mainstream papers, and then you had like even a plethora of black papers, the '[Chicago] Defender', the 'Crusader', the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --'Metro News'. Speaker 2: There were maybe half a dozen, you'd say, prominent, regularly published, at least once a week, black papers. The 'Defender' at that time was three or four times a week. Speaker 1: Daily, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a daily, and you could also say that you were starting to get an Hispanic press that was starting to emerge then too. And that was very exciting. You had the Mexican community and the Puerto Rican community, each had papers there. And that's still a trend that we see in this country, that the growth area in newspapers is in community papers, whether they're English or foreign language papers, and they still--the foreign language papers still follow the emergence of new immigrant communities. You've all--Chicago's always had a lot of foreign language papers, back in the days when Germans, Poles, Italians were large communities, they had newspapers in their language. And this is, today, even in this Internet age, we who are still putting out print publications are being advised to make 'em local because that's where the growth is. And even when you're covering national news, localize it as much as possible. That's the, that's your biggest competition against the Internet. So it's, the old experience still has some value for me in this new century, although I tell my son, this is your century. I'm just lucky to be walking around in it. Speaker 1: So in Chicago in those days, I can only remember some of them. So you have to help me out. I know Lu Palmer would have been at the 'Daily News', right, when you came to town? Speaker 2: Let me think now. When I first came, he was still there, yeah. He was trying to get the 'Daily News' to print his Black Panther stories. Speaker 1: Right, and there was a controversy going on, yeah. Speaker 2: Yeah, he had a bad run in with the man who was his city editor then. And he left so bitter, he said he would never put himself in a position where he's edited by any white man ever again. He was just blaming the whole white race for it, and it was a--but Lou was, Lou was a very smart man. I think he was more emotionally wrought than he needed to be over that, but it resulted in his trying very hard to get a viable black newspaper going. And he got a couple of 'em going, the 'Black Express' was one in particular that was quite successful and influential. But I learned from that experience, again, back to John Johnson [businessman and publisher], that you take these two extremes. You know, you've got a great journalist running a publication, and doesn't know that much about business (laughter). And that's about a big priority with him making a profit, and he goes out of business. You got another man who's a great businessman, who has a journalistic sensibility, wants to provide a good service publication that has high appeal, but his first priority is to stay in business (laughter). And he stays in business 'cause (unclear) have an influence. And so, you know, to me when I talk about the broccoli and ice cream decisions that we, as media people have to make, I think about the Lu Palmer versus John Johnson that, these are two different success models, that I've seen this happen regardless of race. I've seen a lot of really fine publications, unable to stay in business because journalists don't make great business people (laughter). Story_ID: 37608 Speaker 1: Now, Vernon Jarrett [also a HistoryMaker], he was there then, right, at the-- Speaker 2: Okay, Vernon was-- Speaker 1: Was he at the '[Chicago] Tribune'? Speaker 2: Vernon came to the 'Tribune' while I was in the [U.S.] Army. In fact, before that-- Speaker 1: Okay, so he wasn't there yet. Speaker 2: He wasn't there yet. I met him after I came back from the Army. I actually had more seniority at the 'Tribune' than him. He just had more seniority in life (laughter) and journalism and everything else. And just a quick aside about Vernon, he was, he was a mentor to me and to numerous, a whole generation of black journalists there in Chicago [Illinois] 'cause we were all the first, you know, in our newsrooms. And he, what, in the late '70s [1970s], and when I was promoted to assistant city editor, his son, Tommy, his second son, was one of my copy boys (laughter) in the newsroom when copy boys were now becoming known as copy clerks now. But he, what, fast forward, that was late '70s [1970s], fast forward to 2009, and his daughter, Tracy Jarrett was an intern of mine here in our Washington [District of Columbia] bureau. So it's like, I know I'm getting old now, but she's just a terrific talent and wants to follow in her grandfather's tradition and worked with HistoryMakers, in fact, before she was, she interned in my office. And it's great to see this happening because I look at Vernon, Tommy and Tracy, and I see these three different generations. And I think about how different for each of them the world is for their perspectives and their possibilities. And it's--Vernon used to always say, you know, "You stand on the shoulders of giants," you know, and I think about Tracy. Now, he's got another couple generations of giants that she's standing on. And she's the same age as my son, and I think about, that's why when I say, this is their century. I'm just walking around in it because there are new possibilities opening up for them. There's also new challenges that they're facing in this world that we handed onto them. Story_ID: 37609 Speaker 1: But, yeah, when I came along [to work at the 'Chicago Tribune' in 1969], though, we had four dailies [newspapers] and it was a transitional period, as are all periods for us. To me, it was a transition from the old Chicago [Illinois] journalism to the new journalism. I worked-- Speaker 2: Define that. What would be the difference? Speaker 1: Well, for example, the old journalism was the classic front page, Charles McCarthy and Ben Hicks, classic play, the, where reporters are almost all men. You'll have the one feisty, "Our Gal Friday," but they're almost all men. You walk in the newsroom into a smoky haze, and the smell of alcohol. And, although some things haven't changed, but (laughter) anyway, you can't smoke anymore anyway, but (laughter), but there was also, well, for example--I mean that was, you know, that old model was the one that I had embraced when I got into this business, you know, that front page, just the facts man, and "Dateline Danger." There were certain things. I mean every, almost every guy I knew in my generation, we'd all seen Bogart [Humphrey Bogart] and we'd seen Dateline Danger, and we'd seen two or three different versions of the 'Front Page'. We, the women had all followed Brenda Star (laughter) in the comics, and they had all grown up with those-- Speaker 2: Lois Lane (laughter). Speaker 1: --role models, Lois Lane, thank you, yes. You know, we all came in with those kind of fantasies in our heads. And there was, I remember when I was assigned to cover the police beat over at 11th and State [streets] there in Chicago, Walter Sperkle (ph.) was the star '[Chicago] Sun-Times' reporter, crime reporter. He had covered Al Capone's trials. He, his first assignment when he was a kid, a seventeen-year old kid at the Chicago City News Bureau, not his first assignment, but one of his first stories turned out to be the St. Valentine's Day Massacre. He'd gotten this tip that seven bodies had been found dead in this warehouse on the North Side. It turned out that was the St. Valentine's Day Massacre, and I just loved working with this guy. He could just regale you for hours with stories, you know, and guys like him. That was the older generation. They were on the verge of retirement or death or both and here we, us, the '60s [1960s] kids were coming up, moving in. Speaker 2: So were you the first black reporter at the 'Tribune'? Speaker 1: No, I was the third. Speaker 2: Third, okay. Speaker 1: Let's see, oh, I'm sorry, third one in the newsroom. We had one, there had been one black reporter who was hired in '65 [1965] in the Gary Bureau, purposefully. They wanted to test him out (laughter). They weren't ready to, you know, they were worried about the races in the newsroom, you know, whether it would be too disruptive, like, you talk about--it's like talking about people, you know, open gays in the military. It was like the same kind of language now, you know, well, it might be too disruptive. We might, you know, not be able to put a newspaper out. Story_ID: 37610 Speaker 1: And I could spend all day talking about just that alone, but, 'Tribune', but Joe [Joseph] Boyce [also a HistoryMaker] was the first black reporter in the newsroom. He was a former Chicago cop, had no journalism experience, but some people, reporter who'd worked with him over at the Federal Building knew he was a very smart guy. And somebody just suggested, 'cause they knew that editors at the paper were about desperate now to get a black reporter, at least one in there. So he's perfect, a former Chicago cop, he's a family man, he plays jazz on the weekends, blah, blah, blah, affable, smart. And so he was the first one, but the first day on the job, when he wrote a story that was assigned to him by a young woman, Georgia English was her name, she--he turned it in, and it was just a short piece. And she said, well, this is nice, Joe, just one question. Has anybody talked to you about what a lead is? (laughter) He said, well, no. What is that? She said, well, a lead is the first paragraph of the news story, and it really contains the essence of what the story is about. (laughter) Joe didn't know--that's the first thing you learn the first day at J school [journalism school]. You know, it's like Joe didn't know the first thing about writing a news story. And nobody bothered to show him. Well, he went back. He rewrote it, the story got in the paper, but that was--this shows you, you know, how things were at that point. Story_ID: 37683 Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Clarence Eugene Page, C-L-A-R-E-N-C-E, E-U-G-E-N-E and P-A-G-E, no "I". And I'm a columnist with the 'Chicago Tribune'. Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: June 2nd, 1947 in Dayton, Ohio. Speaker 1: And where, I'm sorry, what is today's date and where are we today? Speaker 2: What is today's date? It's March 7th, right? (Laugher) Okay, March 7th, 2012, and we are in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] in the Bureau of the 'Chicago Tribune'. Story_ID: 37684 Speaker 1: All right, so we're gonna pick up where we left off. We did eight [six] sections last time, and we're picking up today with you in Chicago [Illinois] at the 'Chicago Tribune' out of journalism school [Ohio Universituy, Athens, Ohio] and out of the [U.S.] Army. I think you spent like two years in the Army? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: You didn't leave the United States, right? Speaker 2: I was in, I was Germany for the summer of 1970, in fact, assigned to an artillery unit as an Army journalist. It was a training operation basically, and so it was certainly more pleasant than going to Vietnam at the time, and but, I feel like my two years of Army experience was a gift from the tax payers to give me a chance to do some growing up I needed to do (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything significant from that period of time that you remember? Speaker 2: Well, not terribly. I was, most of the time I was in the States. I went through basic training at Fort Dix, New Jersey. I went to DINFOS, the Defense Information School. As a draftee, I was sent there. For some reason, they figured out I had more aptitude at typing than throwing hand grenades. And I wound up at the military journalism school and received a 71 Quebec MOS Military Occupational Specialty and was assigned journalism duties with an artillery unit, the 212th Field Artillery Group out of Fort Lewis, Washington and spent the summer of '70 [1970] on training missions in Germany and then spent the rest of my time at Fort Lewis, Washington. So that was quite pleasant. I got to see a part of the country I was not familiar with before and, but then I came back. As much as they tried to get me to re-enlist, I (laughter), I couldn't wait to get back to Chicago and continue the career that I only got started before I left. Story_ID: 37685 Speaker 1: Okay, so you come back to Chicago [Illinois] in '71 [1971]? Speaker 2: In 1971, September. Speaker 1: '71 [1971], okay, and you go right back to the '[Chicago] Tribune'? Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: And it says here that you did a variety of beats including police, rewrite, religion, neighborhood news, freelance assignments and as a critic with 'Tempo', all that. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, when I came back, I was a general assignment reporter in the neighborhood news section, which in those days was where all the new reporters were assigned. And I migrated, eventually, after a few months, out to the newsroom as a general assignment reporter. And it was a terrific experience. I mean when you're on general assignment, you're ready to cover any news that's going on that day. And so I got to cover some really, gosh, I remember the IC train crash in 1970s, [1972] which was a major train, a commuter train disaster in the Loop. But that was the day I got next to the original Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] and got a chance to interview him out there when he got to the scene. He was as shocked as everybody else by the devastation. I also, I'd say my first interesting experience that was really significant for my career was seeing, meeting, covering Jesse Jackson in 1969 before I got drafted, actually, back in the 'Operation Breadbasket' days. And even today now, well over forty years later (laughter), Jesse Jackson and I have this relationship that he has with all the reporters and other people he's known for a long time. You know, even though I've criticized him more times than a few in various commentaries and all, he still knows that I know him better than most people do. And he still comes to me very often, you know, for different kinds of issues that he wants to bring up. And it's like I've seen such a transition for the Civil Rights Movement. I've seen a big transition for our cities over the years, for Chicago. But that was the kind of experience. I could go from covering Jesse Jackson by day to going to a freelance rock concert that evening with Chaka Khan and, and cover or review that or interview her or various other stars. I, mostly though, covered a lot of the ordinary grind that urban reporters cover which is fires and police stories and the kind of irregular disasters that occurs. One of my mentors said at the time, when things are going the way they're supposed to, it's not news. And so I got to cover a lot of things that weren't going the way they were supposed to. Story_ID: 37686 Speaker 1: And in '72 [1972], I volunteered for a task force investigation as we used to call it, and worked undercover as a election worker in the primary of 1972, along with a team of about a dozen other journalists from the '[Chicago] Tribune'. And-- Speaker 2: So were these dozen other journalist already employed by the 'Tribune' or did they bring 'em in this for this job? Speaker 1: Most of them were other 'Tribune' reporters. A few of them were members of the Better Government Association [BGA], and it was, they, some of the BGA people trained us in what to watch for at polling places for various kinds of vote theft or fraud, people voting under false names or, which there's really very little of that, that goes on by the way (laughter) 'cause that's, this issue comes back time and again. Not many people go to the trouble of voting who are not qualified actually to go vote. But nevertheless, Chicago [Illinois] does have a history, especially back in the glory days of the, of political machines, of paying people with a bottle of wine or a five dollar bill or whatever to go in and vote for the organization and do a ballot switch so that the guy out in the street, the precinct captain would have proof that the vote had been cast, that kind of thing. So anyway, that-- Speaker 2: Let's so, let's, maybe we should set this up if people don't understand, I don't think would understand like what Chicago is like, the-- Speaker 1: I just wanna point out that that series got us a Pulitzer Prize, which was a great, a nice gold star on my resume at the time. But continue with the question. Speaker 2: Well, just give us an idea of how the mayor had been in power and what party is in power and what the, you know-- Speaker 1: Well, Chicago is known for being about as democratic of a town as Moscow [Russia] was a Communist Party town (laughter). It was a--but I came to Chicago full of ideals and thinking I was going to liberate Chicago from the tyranny of this Mayor Daley, and I, I was--I really got a good education on the streets. My big shock, college boy, that I was, you know, was to discover that most Chicagoans loved Mayor Daley, and I mean "loved," didn't just support him. They loved him. He had an iconic presence. As one of my friends who grew up there said that, he said, I was twelve years old before I found out that Mayor Daley wasn't the title of the office (laughter). He said when he was about, you know, 11 or 12, he asked his parents, you know, "Who'll be the next Mayor Daley if this Mayor Daley dies?" (laughter) And it's like that was just how iconic of a figure he was. And-- Speaker 2: His name on the garbage trucks. Speaker 1: Oh sure, he, Daley's name everywhere, but what's more important was Daley's presence. I mean Chicago's the kind of city that is villages. I know Mike Royko's book 'Boss' came out about the time that I arrived in the city coming back from the [U.S.] Army, and it was very helpful because Royko explained how Chicago works, and really, most big cities work, better than anybody in conversational tones anybody could understand. Number One, it's a city of neighborhoods, any one of which is like a village, any one of which is inhabited by people who, for the most part, may have been born, grown up, gone to school, gotten married, raised a family and died within five blocks (laughter). That's how concentrated each of those neighborhoods is. Each one is a village, each one is a town. Chicago is a city with fifty aldermen, fifty wards. That's the biggest city council in America and probably the biggest in the world. I mean it's just, I go other places, they're astonished when I tell 'em, there're fifty wards. But each of those wards is its own little fiefdom. So for, you know, its own little power block. So anybody that's gonna be mayor of that town and constitutionally, it's a weak mayor system (laughter), which always sounds ironic and paradoxical. But it's a weak mayor system under constitutional law which only means, under political science theory, that you wind up with leaders who are exceptionally strong because they have to be in order to function, to get anything done because the force of law behind them isn't that great. Otherwise, they're gonna have city council opposing them. I think that's one of the reasons why, well, [President] Barack Obama came to Chicago because after, you know, Harold Washington was mayor to get an education in how big cities really work. And Heaven knows, he's run into the same thing with Congress running up against this opposition block. And ironically, Barack Obama's chief political advisor is David Axelrod who was an intern under me in the 1970s at the 'Chicago Tribune' when I was assistant city editor. And I, and David came to the paper at the age of twenty-four from the--he was about twenty-four. He came from the University of Chicago campus. And he was the only intern I ever had who knew not only the names of all 50 aldermen, but knew the names of all 50 ward committeemen, (laughter) which is where the real power is. You know, behind that elected alderman, there's the ward committeeman, who is the party's representative in that ward. And when you figure out that system, when you figure out the wards and the neighborhoods, each of which in those days certainly was dominated by one ethnic group and had its own history--and it was like a big United Nations, sometimes more united than others, then you could figure out the town. Story_ID: 37687 Speaker 1: And when I was sent to Africa in '76' [1976] as a reporter, and I was talking to an old British hand with the BBC who had been reporting in Africa for years, and I said, "What do I need to know?" And he said, Number One to understand African politics, you have to understand the tribes. That's the thing to learn. Don't worry about the political parties and all this. Find out who the--who belongs to which tribe and which tribe dominates in that country. And then you can begin to really figure it out. And he was right, and I said, you know, I'm already experienced at this from learning how things work in Chicago [Illinois] (laughter) because each one of those wards is like its own little country and each one's got its own ethnic tribe that's dominant and working in coalition with others. So it was a very exciting time, and I honestly came into this business with dreams of being an entertainment writer and reporter actually. First, you know, my role model was like Walter Winchell or Ed Sullivan back when I was in high school. In college, my role models were at 'Rolling Stone' and other magazines and pop culture media. But I found myself more and more working in Chicago, getting drawn into politics, the whole political realm, and covering political rock stars (laughter), various other folks. But there's a lot of similarities between politics and show business. So, and really it shaped my life in a whole different way than what I was initially expecting. Story_ID: 37688 Speaker 1: Okay, so when you're in Chicago [Illinois], I think the Panther trial was--was that still (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, in fact, the Panthers, before the trial, the thing the trial was about was the murder of Fred Hampton and Mark Clark. Yeah, that summer of '69 [1969] before I got drafted [to the U.S. Army], I not only met and witnessed Jesse Jackson, but also I went over on my own and got to know the Panthers and did stories on them. And most of 'em never got in the paper because the editors in those days, they said, "Well, we don't wanna give those radicals any publicity." You know, and I said, this is history man (laughter), you know, trying to make that point when you're a young reporter on a paper that's socially conservative in its own way. I mean, you know, people talk about liberal media. You know, inside the media, people are very conservative. They don't wanna change anything. They wanna do things the same way they've always done 'em, and even at that time, the only way I had any leverage at all at that time was the, people talk about newspapers losing readers today, they were losing readers already in the '60s [1960s]. You know, the TV era was already well established and newspapers were already fighting for their lives and-- Speaker 1: There were three newspapers when you came-- Speaker 2: Four. Speaker 1: Four, okay. Speaker 2: When I first got to Chicago, there were four dailies. I'm thinking there was, maybe three cities in the whole country that had four dailies at that time, if that many. Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] had three, and it was really a-- Speaker 1: I know the 'Daily News' was still going on when I got there, shortly. Speaker 2: And 'Chicago Today' as it was called, formerly, the 'American' which was a Hearst paper. The 'Tribune' company bought it, and by the time I got there in '69 [1969], they had just changed the name to 'Chicago Today'. It turned into a nice spritely tabloid and it was an afternoon paper. The 'Daily News' was an afternoon paper owned by the Marshall Field's family, and that, along with the '[Chicago] Sun-Times'. And the 'Daily News' had the most Pulitzers [Pulitzer Prize] in town and also had, everybody pretty much agreed, the best writers and reporters and reporting team, not the largest, couldn't afford it, which teachers are something, having quality journalists and don't make money (laughter). You know, but the '[Chicago] Tribune' was always the biggest paper, and we certainly had a fantastic team, but the 'Daily News' had more Pulitzers at that time. And, you know, we eventually caught up, but, gosh, the 'Daily News' went out of business what, the early or in the mid-'70s [1970s] when it just, yeah, the [Mike] Royko-- Speaker 1: Yeah, around '78 [1978]. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, late '70s [1970s], yeah, Royko moved over to the 'Sun-Times'. Then he later moved over to the 'Tribune' when Rupert Murdock took over the 'Sun-Times'. But anyway, the, the, it's what made it a great news town. You had four daily newspapers. You also had some very aggressive news, TV news and radio news people. You had a lot of news to cover, and you had a legacy, you had a legend behind it, going back to the days of Ben Hecht and Charlie MacArthur, Charles MacArthur, authors of 'The Front Page', which has been made into movies at least half a dozen different times, including what my, our gal Friday, a gender integrated version (laughter). And it's classic, and I love it. I've got it on DVD and all. And it's like the romance of being a Chicago journalist or a Chicago--we were reporters in those days. We weren't journalists. We were reporters. We were photographers, and that excitement was there. But it was also an excitement because for me, as one of the first African American journalists in the downtown press, it was an interesting period because, you know, I always say we were hired under that great Affirmative Action program called "urban riots" in the late '60s [1960s]. You had riots going on. Before that, the downtown papers, the 'Tribune' didn't have any black reporters, the 'American' didn't, the 'Daily News' and the 'Sun-Times', I think had one or two. Story_ID: 37689 Speaker 1: Lu Palmer was--was he still with the 'Daily News' when you got there [to Chicago, Illinois in 1969]? Speaker 2: Lu Palmer, I'm thinking Lu Palmer came to the 'Daily News' about '67 [1967], I think. I would say '66 [1966] or '67 [1967], it seems to me. And in '69 [1969] when I came along, we--Lou had the best sources of anybody in the Black Panthers and in the police department regarding the Panthers. He was having the same trouble I was having. He had this one editor that he had had a feud with, and Lou eventually got so frustrated, he quit and said, "I will put myself in a position of being edited by any white man ever again." I mean he was just really bitter about the whole thing and all. But Lou also became such a, what, a civic agitator, if you will. He helped to launch the Harold Washington mayoral campaign. So did Vernon Jarrett [also a HistoryMaker] who was over at our paper. And Vernon was another great--he was "the" great wise man of Chicago, black journalists, I'd say (laughter). You know, he came to the 'Chicago Defender' back in the '40s [1940s] when you had, again, that was a great romantic era for the black press through that whole era. And he got to interview-- Speaker 1: Yeah, the 'Defender', yeah, I was gonna ask you about the 'Defender' and what-- Speaker 2: Well, I was going to say parenthetically, Vernon got to interview W.E.B Dubois. He got to interview the great historymakers of that period coming along, but he became a historymaker himself, as far as we're all concerned. I'm proud to say that, when I did become assistant city editor in the '70s [1970s], one of my copy clerks, what used to be called "copy boys," was Vernon's son, Tommy Jarrett (laughter), who later became a camera operator at ABC. And here just recently, a couple of years ago, my intern was Tracy Jarrett, who's Tommy's daughter (laughter). So I've gone through three generations of Jarretts here, and I'm proud to have played some role in helping Tracy launch her career 'cause she's over at grad school, at Columbia University, and just been a dynamite worker. She wants to follow in her grand-dad's tradition. So it's a wonderful thing to see. Story_ID: 37690 Speaker 1: But anyway, enough of my grand old man reminiscing, back to the [Black] Panther days, I got to know the Panthers really on my own. Nobody ever assigned me to go out and cover the Panthers--maybe once. They were doing a food give-a-way one Saturday, a slow news day. I was sent out undercover. But mostly, I went out on my own and got to know the Panthers, and I also got to know some of the SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] folks. I met Bernadine Dohrn and Bill Ayers way back then, before they became Weather underground fugitives. And that's another story, we can go into if you want, but I--what really broke my heart was I was in basic training in Fort Dix, New Jersey when I got the news that Fred Hampton and Mark Clark had been killed. And I felt like, you know, I said right away, this was murder for one thing. It was early in the morning, and ain't no black folks around plotting any revolution (laughter) at four o'clock in the morning in a West Side apartment like this. I mean even in Fort Dix, New Jersey, just what I could read of the piece, I knew this was a setup. I wasn't as paranoid as the Panthers were. Panthers had always been telling me about, "Well, our phone's tapped, listen to the click," and blah, blah, blah. And I said, "Yeah, right, everybody's phone is tapped," it's the '60s [1960s] and all this. Little did I know, we found out when the COINTELPRO files were revealed, J. Edgar Hoover's entire plot, it really was a--sometimes there really is a conspiracy when people have a conspiracy theory. Speaker 2: What they called the Red Squad in Chicago-- Speaker 1: That wasn't even part of the Federal effort, but he did work with the Red Squad, yeah. Yeah, the Red Squad was Keystone Cops by comparison. I mean, it's significant in that, I don't know how many departments had an actual, what, anti-subversion division they called the Red Squad, you know, (laughter) but Chicago had it. But they were kind of a joke with a lot of people. I remember the SDS convention in 1969 where the, at the old Chicago Coliseum, which was "the" place where the Weather Underground was born in that convention. There was, it was very high profile. They were, you know, us reporters were sent down there and did news conferences with the Weather underground folks, and everybody could look across the street and wave at the Red Squad folks in the abandoned building across the street there. You could see 'em up there with their cameras, you know, blah, blah, blah. And so like I say, it was kind of a joke. And the, a lot of things were kind of a joke. I mean the Weather, the SDS folks were so proud of all the press they were getting, and they said, "Well, we ought to use this to help the people or something." And Bernadine Dohrn announced they were gonna charge reporters like $25 (laughter) or something, the major press, to pay $25 per reporter or photographer and the Chicago Seed, the underground paper, and said, "Well, what about us? We don't have any money." They said, "Well, you can get by free and the others"--I said, "Well, that's not fair, you know," blah, blah, blah, "Here I'll pay your $5." And that finally passed. But it shows you how unprofessional (laughter) all of this was and how it was kind of a combination of, well, politics for the hell of it as Abbie Hoffman used to say, the Yippies and all that. I say the fun went out of it all when folks found out you could get killed doing this. The Panthers got killed. The Panthers were conspired against. Story_ID: 37691 Speaker 1: The next year, you had Kent State [University], you had Jackson State [University], you had students getting killed. At Kent State, you had white students getting killed. That had a big impact. It's much more remembered than Jackson State where there were actually more kids, but that was a black school down South. But when people found out, you know, just students themselves, I could see it was palpable. And I was back in Ohio when Kent State happened. I was at the Ohio U [University] campus, in fact, 'cause well, on leave by coincidence when [President Richard] Nixon bombed Cambodia. And you could feel the, a lot of air went out of the movement when that happened 'cause folks weren't just dancing in the streets now. They saw you could get killed and people got really somber and really dour and got really angry. And that was when the, you know, the Weather underground became more--I think it started out as a Weatherman faction, and then became the Weather people, something like that 'cause they, it was, they were working off the Bob Dylan line, "You don't need a weatherman to know which way the wind blows." And, but they got really militant and you got--and then when Nixon ended the draft, all the steam just went right out of the new Left. Kids, you know, the whole--so much of the anti-war movement was the anti-draft movement really. And there in 1970, young people went back to their studies or they left campus, the guys, especially. My college, Ohio University must have shrunk from 15,000 down to around 12,000 in the course of a year because that was just how many guys were on campus just to avoid the draft. It was obvious, you know. And that was happening across the country. And so it was like, that was all kind of going on while I was in the service [U.S. Army]. Story_ID: 37692 Speaker 1: But when I came back [to Chicago, Illinois], the [Black] Panthers weren't as strong as they used to be. Fred Hampton was an important leader. Bobby Rush took over. He'd been the vice chairman. And today, he's a-- Speaker 2: Were all those kind of cases in the news, I know the African American Police League, Renault Robinson-- Speaker 1: Renault Robinson, yeah-- Speaker 2: --and the [Black] Panther case. Speaker 1: --who later became part of the Harold Washington, well, one of the fine (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --of Mayor Daley and the machine politics. So you, so when you get back, you're part of this undercover team. Now, we can maybe go into (laughter)--I just wanted you to set it up 'cause it's, you know, it's just so much going on. Speaker 1: Yeah, well, yeah, all this was going on, yeah. And the undercover operation, that was essentially a one-day operation on the primary election day. I worked in a polling place on the South Side along with another reporter. We were both legally credentialed poll workers. What, she was a judge and I was a poll watcher, as they say. And our job was to watch, make sure there's no shenanigans. And usually it's not a big deal, but with us, we were also reporters who were looking for shenanigans to write about. And so, it was pretty minor stuff at my polling place, but a couple of others, especially on the West Side--one of, a couple of my colleagues, they were kicked out of the polling place. They were run out of it 'cause the local precinct captain there was affiliated with the street gangs, and he knew that--he wanted to be sure that everybody working that polling place was somebody he put there. And so here were these two strangers coming in from downtown, and they were both white to boot on the West--in a black ward on the West Side. And when they refused to leave, all of a sudden about thirty gangbangers come in and are standing behind them (laughter), menacingly, and they decided, we'd better go and we'll just write about it. And they did, you know, that kind of thing happened. But Bill Mullin, who just retired from the paper, he was--Bill Mullin, well, he did the most work of anybody 'cause he got himself a job in the, in the Board of Election Commissioners office as a $90.00 a week file clerk, which is, you know, this low-level job, no profile at all. And Bill was a great undercover reporter 'cause he hardly talked, you know, very quiet guy, unassuming. He'd come into work with his brown bag and his sandwich, and he worked the day and eat his sandwich and leave, (laughter) you know. It was perfect because whenever nobody was looking, he was going through those files there looking for ghost voters. He found over a hundred dead people who'd been voting for (laughter) a number of years. And that was the real clincher. That was the, that was the big headline on the first day of the series that we did. And, but, you know, this was really, you know, learning political science from the inside. This is different than the classroom that I'd been in on campus. But at the same time this was going on now, this is 1972, and, you know, this was the primary election that nominated George McGovern, and who went down in flames running for president, but it also established that Mayor Daley, who did not back McGovern, you know, that--if you wanted to get to the White House, you'd better come through Mayor Daley. Everybody knew this, but just more firmly established it. Jesse Jackson was part of the descending group, the young generation there at the Democratic Convention that was pulling the party to the left. And Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton were part of that, you know, young activist group there in the party. So that was a year that shaped party politics for years to come. Story_ID: 37693 Speaker 1: But also in Chicago [Illinois], you know, you had Ralph Metcalfe, Congressman Ralph Metcalfe, Olympic Silver medalist, right there along with Jesse Owens, who was a Congressman, who had a falling out with Mayor Daley over the police brutality issue. And this was significant because that was the first break by an establishment black, political leader, against the Daley Machine. And-- Speaker 2: And that was over the Doc Odom beating? Speaker 1: Yes, Doc Odom was a good friend of Ralph Metcalfe's and he got roughed up by the police one night in a traffic stop, and Metcalfe was appalled. You know, he heard about a lot of, you know, stuff happening with the cops, but here was a respected African American physician in the community and some cop is treating him like a street punk. And that just got to Metcalfe, and he--and I was sent down (laughter), I was sent as a general assignment reporter. See, they had sent me down to cover this, it wasn't a news conference, it was a rally. It was an anti-police brutality rally where Metcalfe was the featured speaker. And, you know, I'm new in town still now. You know, I didn't realize, and I knew Ralph Metcalfe. Well, he was nationally famous, but I didn't know the context and all of Chicago politics that well at the time. But, you know, I covered the story fine, but everybody else around me was so excited about Ralph Metcalfe said this, I mean white folks, black folks, (laughter) everybody was saying Ralph Metcalfe said this. And as we would find out, you know, years later as things would progress, that was the beginning of a major break. You had the [Black] Panthers. It was a lot of anger in the community after the Panther murders. It was a anger when it came out that J. Edgar Hoover practically engineered this from Washington [District of Columbia]. There was anger when, oh, that same election by the way, when I was working undercover, that was the election that overthrew Ed Hanrahan, who was the State's Attorney, who was the Daley, hand-picked State's Attorney who had engineered the Panther raid. And then on top of that, tried to cover it up, brought my newspaper into it by bringing the photos when everybody said, this looks like murder, said, no, no, they fired back. And his office slipped my newspaper, the 'Chicago Tribune' these photos of bullet holes in the doorway of the Panther apartment, which were fired--holes from bullets fired by the Panthers. That's what Hanrahan said (laughter), but we printed them, page one, you know. And what, the next day our readers, you didn't even need to have your glasses on to look and see those weren't bullet holes. They were nail holes. It's a big-ass difference (laughter). Story_ID: 37622 Speaker 1: This undercover effort [on the polls; on primary election day in 1972], what was the upshot of that? Did anything change as a result of the-- Speaker 2: About six people were indicted. I don't remember how many were convicted of any charges. But a half a dozen people were indicted as a result of our investigation. And Chicago [Illinois]--I'd love to tell you that Chicago elections became completely clean after that. I can't tell you that, but I can tell you that they became cleaner because a lot more people knew that they were being watched. And they couldn't just be as cavalier about those polling places and how elections were run as they had been. And it was, it was little things like that that led to a new era in urban politics in cities. Mayors became more professional and they weren't the old, ethnic, tribal chiefs they had been for decades, not just Chicago, but New York, L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and other cities. Speaker 1: So, I guess in some ways the overreaching of the police department and the mayor's office and in a lot of ways with the [Black] Panther trial and this election fraud investigation, [Edward] Hanrahan's defeat the polls after, as a result of the Panther murders all spell like, it's a possibility to change things in the city. Speaker 2: There were trends going on. You, this was shown well in the 'Eyes on the Prize' documentary series. You know, the first series was about the '60s [1960s] Civil Rights Movement, mainly. But the second one was about what happened after the '60s [1960s], what happened after Dr. [Martin Luther] King and all. And it ends with Harold Washington's election, the very last episode of 'Eyes on the Prize'. And this is significant because you saw, you know, the Civil Rights Movement led to the Black Power Movement which led to the Black Panthers. The Black Panthers led to a new awareness of urban poverty, urban education issues and police misconduct and Civil rights in the North really in that sense. And heightened awareness, led to a new activism in the North. And Chicago was emblematic of this. Somebody, an iconic figure like Ralph Metcalfe, making his break showed that he made it safe for the black, middle-class now to join in the movement, outside of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Urban League. He made it safe for people to come to the streets and be angry and I'm not gonna say totally safe. You could still get beat up, but it was, but your reputation was enhanced. It was not brought down, and if you did not participate in supporting the movement, you were socially marginalized. That was a flip flop for African Americans in Chicago and elsewhere. And this was all going on there, trying to remember, like in the '70s [1970s] where we had the, the Panthers were fading as such. But people like Bobby Rush running for City Council, became an alderman, later became a Congressman. And we, when I introduced my son to him on Capitol Hill, I said, you know, I knew Bobby Rush when he was vice chairman of the Illinois Black Panther Party. Twenty years later, he was vice chairman of the Illinois Democratic Party. As we a great country or what, you know? (laughter) But that was emblematic of the changes going on in this country at that time. And now, you know, in Congress, ironically, Bobby Rush is the only person who ever beat Barack Obama [President Obama] in an election (laughter), and it's a good thing too for Barack Obama because if Barack Obama had won, he'd probably still be sitting over in Congress, over there, just one more congressman. But, you know, one thing leads to another in history. You don't know what event, what the consequences of some event are going to be down the line. And I can say happily, you know, that my career put me in places where I got to see things that turned out to have consequence later on. I missed a few things that I regret. I was invited to go along with some friends to Woodstock, and didn't, you know, I'm not gonna go all the way to New York for a rock concert, you know (laughter). And I missed that bit of history. I missed being in, and getting beat up in Grant Park in the summer of '68 [1968] but, on another excursion that I passed up. But I'm happy, you know, with the experiences and exposure I've had. Story_ID: 37623 Speaker 1: Well, in '76 [1976], you became a foreign correspondent to South Africa. Now, how did that take place? Speaker 2: Well, it was funny. I, another funny story. I was rather annoyed that we, well, there was talk, front-page headline talk of the U.S. possibly going to war in Africa in Angola and Mozambique after the Portuguese pulled out, civil war broke out in those countries and I, at the time, the managing editor, Max McCrowen (ph.), had the first staff meeting of its kind we'd ever had, just coincidentally. It was a meeting of the general staff, get to know the staff and get ideas and feedback from the reporters. They'd never done this at the '[Chicago] Tribune' before, shows you how things were changing in newspapers. They were becoming more democratic, if you will, to hear from the bottom up, the people who actually work out on the streets. And I think everybody was caught so off guard by this, we were all in this big auditorium there in the [Tribune] Tower, that when he asked us for "questions, concerns, suggestions" that we had, whatever was on our minds, nobody put their hand up (laughter). And, you know how you have people sitting there and nobody wants to break the ice, right? Well, old Clarence, the little idealistic Clarence, I stuck my hand up, and I said, you know, very cordially, "Mr. McCrowen, I was just wondering, you know, with all the--I see every day we've got stories on page one about Angola and Mozambique and they're all wire stories. And any time anything happens in the Middle East, between Israel and Egypt and such, we will send at least one correspondent. I've seen us send four or five correspondents and a photographer to stories like this were happening a little farther Northern there in the Middle East. So I was wondering if we have any kind of plans for sending anybody over to Central Africa for these stories. And also the brewing uprisings in South Africa and this civil war in what was then Rhodesia, which is now Zimbabwe." And so, you know, I just very honestly asked these questions. And Max was caught off guard (laughter), he was caught off guard by the question. And I always remember, he was a very nice man, Australian, later went to UPI [United Press International], but I never will forget him saying, "Well, Clarence, actually, I'm, that hadn't occurred to us, but I'll be happy to get back to you on that." And I said, oh, well, thank you very much, sir. And I sat down, and then other people raised their hands, you know, and things started to move; didn't think much about till the next day I come to the office and the city editor says, hey, the ME wants to talk to you. The ME, Managing Editor (laughter), Max McCrowen. And he said, be in his office at four [o'clock]. Ooh, shoot, what's going on here (laughter), you know. I got to his office at four o'clock, and there was a whole bunch of, all the senior editors were in there sitting around. And I walk in the door, and Max turns and says, oh, Clarence, good to see you. Please come in, sit down. We're going to send you to South Africa next week, and we wanna be sure that you're going to be all set. We're going to send you over to London [England] first to meet with Jim Younger who is currently our Europe correspondent, and we'll team you up with Ernie Cox, has agreed to be the photographer, all this. He's saying all this. And I'm standing, and while he's saying all that, I didn't hear a word of what he just say (laughter). I'm standing there like this, and I'm and in my head, I said, "They're sending who to Africa?" (laughter) Who to South Africa? (laughter) And then Max looks up and he stops talking, he looks up at me, and he says, you do wanna go, don't you? (laughter) Well, I'm still like this, and said, I don't have a passport. And he said, you what? I said, I don't have a passport. I need a passport to go to South Africa, don't I? And he turns to the national editor and says, he doesn't have a passport. And the national editor turns to the city editor and says, he doesn't have a passport. And the city editor looks at me and says, we'll get you a passport. By noon the next day, I had a passport (laughter). How about that for fast service? And I mean, boom, and a couple of days later, I'm over, I'm on my way to--oh, I shouldn't rush this story. Story_ID: 37624 Speaker 1: I did not have the passport the next day. The next day I was on my way to Ohio to get my birth certificate so I could get a passport. It turned out the birth certificate I thought was my birth certificate, was not a birth certificate. It was a hospital certificate, you know, the one that's got the footprint on it, you know. And I remember going over to the passport people and saying, Opps, not the one with the feet, not the one with the feet, but we need the birth certificate. And I, and I tell you, and to make a very long story short, but when I went to go get my birth certificate in Ohio, I found out that I had been adopted. I had never known this before. It was, and I was--what's this, '76 [1976], I was like, not quite twenty-nine years old. It was before my birthday. I was like twenty-eight years old and I found out I'd been adopted. And I had--did I mention this before, by the way? Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you did mention it before, but I don't know if you mentioned it in this context? Speaker 1: In this context, yeah, 'cause this is how I found out because I couldn't get, could not get my original birth certificate under Ohio law. I could only have the replacement certificate. But it turned out my mother, my biological mother [Helen Hood] was, her mother was good friends with my adoptive parents [Maggie Lee Williams Page and Clarence H. Page]. And so back in 1947, when my mom got pregnant and was gonna have the baby, they didn't know what to do with me. But, well, as soon as my parents, the Pages found out that I was on the way, they said, oh, my adoptive mother, Maggie Page, said to my biological grandmother, Ellen, oh, we'll take him, Ellen. He's gonna be wonderful. They didn't know I was a boy yet, but said, we'll take him. In fact, my adoptive mom thought I was gonna be a girl. She was convinced I was gonna be a girl. And when I was finally born, I still have a picture of myself, before my first haircut, dressed up in a dress borrowed from a little girl next door. And my mom put my hair into pigtails and ribbons so she could have at least one photo of me as a girl. So this was, now, I was hardly a year old at the time. So I think this was probably too soon to be permanently damaging at all, but the photograph is still a 'National Enquirer' case, but, no, actually, I did a project kind of like the HistoryMakers project. It was actually a one-shot deal about black families. I was asked to bring photos from my history and all. So I used that one as kind of a climax picture there. My days as a trans--or rather my "day" as a transvestite was at one year old. But my mom finally got used to the fact that I was a boy, and I was gonna stay a boy. But in any case, I found though that I'd been adopted. My parents had just gotten around to telling me and neither had the rest of the family. And it was, so when I got back from Africa, I went down to Ohio, you know, visiting my folks. And we kind of sat down and had a heart-to-heart was when I found the whole story out and all. But it's like, the funny thing, it's--well, something like, to me, it's kind of indicative of what the media mean to my life because I had learned the truth while I was surrounded by my other family, my journalist family, my fellow reporters, I found out that I was adopted. And then I found out later from my own natural family, the details and all that. Story_ID: 37625 Speaker 1: But that was, we went off to South Africa and Rhodesia during that summer and did a series-- Speaker 2: This is '76 [1976]. Speaker 1: This is '76 [1976], and-- Speaker 2: Bicentennial year and-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Bicentennial year, and just after we--while we were over there, we were about to wrap things up when the Soweto uprising occurred. And so we had good timing with that series at a time when the country was looking at South Africa to see what was happening over there. Here, the 'Chicago Tribune' was on top of the story. So I felt thoroughly vindicated. Speaker 2: Tell us about the Soweto uprising. What was it, because I know we saw it on 'Nightline' in those days. Speaker 1: That's true Speaker 2: It was a big deal. And what was the-- Speaker 1: Yeah, well, first of all, you have to know what Apartheid was, which I thought everybody did. But everybody doesn't (laughter). My LaSalle Street stockbroker friends, I mentioned Apartheid, they said, what's that? And you wonder why Wall Street collapses 'cause the stockbrokers are so busy looking at numbers, they don't look at the world, you know. But Apartheid was the Jim Crowe segregation in South Africa when it was run by a white minority regime, for like, as long America, as long as the U.S. has been around, about three [300] or 400 years. And, but Apartheid itself only came into effect about the time I was born, there in the late 1940s. And in 1960 Nelson Mandela was in the ANC, African National Congress. That was the year of the Sharpeville uprising where black, South Africans were mowed down by white police in this big massacre which enraged Mandela and other members of the ANC and turned the ANC from a peaceful, nonviolent protest group into a militant revolutionary group, led to Nelson Mandela being imprisoned in Robin Island for those legendary, what, 27, 28 years. And he was still there, he was still at Robin Island when we were there in the mid-1970s. Apartheid, though, was beginning to be whittled with a new policy, Apart--and nobody said, Apartheid is out, separate development is in. That was the new policy about 1972, separate development became the policy. What that meant was that you had desegregation from the top down. Five-star hotels, five-star restaurants, the ritzy, expensive facilities, if you had the money, you had equal rights. So we booked ourselves, me and Jim Younger, a white correspondent and Ernie Cox, black photographer, the three of us booked ourselves in the Carlton Hotel, which at that time was Johannesburg's finest hotel. And we had the run of the place, unrestricted, except we were told in a number of subtle, unwritten, un, what, informal ways, it would be wise if we did not use the swimming pool or the dance floor (laughter). And it would be an etiquette violation that could have consequences that were more than it was worth. So, well, we just didn't bother to challenge that aspect. But we did, but just getting a dinner meal could be a challenge to the system. So we kind of developed our own little system because Apartheid was so complicated that even the white South Africans didn't really understand it (laughter). So the general etiquette was, when in doubt, leave them out, meaning if you are running a restaurant and some blacks want to come in and eat, and you're not sure what the rule is, the safe thing is just leave them out, and just say we're not licensed to serve you. So we heard that from people, turning us away. And so we developed a system whereas, Jim, the white reporter would go to the door first (laughter), and the maitre'D would say, oh, good evening, sir, a table for one? And he'd say, no, I have a couple of gentlemen with me. And then Ernie and I would jump forth, you know, and then we'd see the guy's face go, ooh, and "Oh, I'm terribly sorry. We're not licensed to serve you". And we'd say, oh, that is so disappointing. We were sitting by the concierge at the Carlton Hotel. And he'd say, oh, the Carlton Hotel? We'd say, yes, we are three American journalists from a very large American newspaper. Oh, American. Yeah, Chicago, the 'Chicago Tribune'. And we might get something like, "Oh, Chicago, Al Capone dat, dat, dat, dat" (laughter). So, you know, this was the lighter side of this assignment. And we did an essay for the house newspaper. I wrote this essay about, you know, big black, you know, "Black reporter in South Africa" with anecdotes like that. And everybody agreed that, I, and the staff, that this piece was better than what we'd written in the paper (laughter) about everybody else because it was a side of life you don't hear about very often. And I, so I still have those stories tucked away for my memoir whenever I write it. But that was just an amazing trip. But we really felt vindicated though. The Soweto riots in the summer of '76 [1976] was the biggest uprising that they had had since Sharpeville in 1960. And when I say big-- Speaker 2: Describe Soweto when it-- Speaker 1: No, Sharpeville was the one in 1960 which caused the ANC and Mandela to become a militant organization. [Simultaneous] Story_ID: 37626 Speaker 1: Yeah, I was just asking you to describe what Soweto [South Africa] was like? Speaker 2: Oh, Soweto is the, at that time, significant to say, Soweto was Southwest townships, the suburban townships just Southwest of the city, which under Apartheid were reserved for black folks from different tribes all over South Africa who came there to Jo-burg [Johannesburg] to work. They would live out in Soweto, over two million people, not really counted all the way in shacks, shanties, some actual government housing and this sort of thing, some private houses. There was a section in Soweto they called the Beverly Hills of Soweto which was occupied by middle-class blacks, you know, merchants and all who had gotten some, who'd become wealthy or gotten some measure of money independently, just through their own entrepreneurship. And that was the Beverly Hills of Soweto. There were also black folks who had gotten to (unclear) Vis Fauters Raun (ph.) University or other facilities and had gotten Bachelors and Masters degrees. They still had to live in Soweto too, you know. And there were some other townships around that were much smaller and closer to the city, Alexandria is very well known, for example. But Soweto was this huge, place over 2 million people out there, not really counted and memorialized in the U2 song, "Where the Streets Have No Name," that's about Soweto 'cause there aren't any street signs. So, Ernie and I--and this is another story in itself, Ernie and I would go to Soweto--it was also against the law for, you know, Americans to go to Soweto at that time, you know, without government permission, and that. So Ernie and I would go, we had the joyful task of going out to the black areas of South Africa, while our white colleague, Jim Younger, got to talk to the white folks (laughter) there in the, some of the government folks and other business folks and all that or just out in the white neighborhoods, you know, getting a picture of what life, what it was like for whites. But I will say, South Africans, white and black, it was true then and still true now, they loved Chicago [Illinois]--they loved politics the same way Chicago people love politics. When we could just be sitting and waiting for a bus or a plane, and white South Africans, when they could hear our American accents, they could come over and just talking politics. It was incredible. And I love politics and so I loved it, but it was so easy to talk to folks over the color line. Ironically, just like here in the U.S., when, down in old Jim Crow Dixie, they would welcome black ambassadors from overseas, but wouldn't welcome black folks who lived down the street. South Africans were the same way. Now, we were coming from outside, we were Americans with American passport, oh, they were just wonderful with us. But they were asking us, well, what the blacks telling you? (laughter) And they really wanted to know, you know, what the black folks--they got black folks in their own home, working, raising their kids, cutting their lawn, everything else, but they're asking us, what are the black folks telling you, 'cause they knew they weren't gonna get the whole story from the black folks they knew. And they--it was really eye opening in so many ways about human nature. And I'm wandering all around with this story. Story_ID: 37627 Speaker 1: But you asked about the Soweto [South Africa] uprising. Yeah, just the Soweto uprising occurred because school children led it in response to a government order that all the black children would have to learn how to read and write and speak Afrikaans. Until then, it was kind of understood that most of the black folks did not wanna, didn't want to learn Afrikaans because, for one thing, that was the language of the oppressor. It was the Afrikaners, when they got into power, and I should, again, define Afrikaners. They're primarily Dutch, historically, Dutch. As I mentioned, there'd been white folks in South Africa since, you know, 400 years. The initial settlers were Dutch. These were merchants, just like the U.S. At the same time the Dutch landed in New Amsterdam, now known as New York, they were landing in Cape, what we know as Cape Town, down there in the Cape of South Africa. And they were Dutch and French Huguenot came along afterwards. They were fleeing Europe, etc. And then when the Brits finally came, made war with the Boers as the, what we now call Afrikaners, drove them inland, that became most, what, most of the white South Africans were and I think are still Afrikaans speakers. But English became the language of money. So blacks then and now wanted to learn English 'cause that's the language that you're gonna really, you know, go somewhere with. And so this order came down in '76 [1976] like other orders do in saying, you will now have to learn Afrikaans. Well, it was like that was the last straw. A lot of the black kids, their beginning was Soweto, and the kids took to the streets. And then the authorities came out. The police came out, many of them black police, and shot some of these kids. It was like Sharpeville all over again, and the pictures flashed around the world of these dead school children in their school uniforms and all this. And that was the beginning of the Soweto uprising. And it never stopped after that. It was like, there was constant--the ANC [African National Congress] kicked up their terrorist activities, as it was called. The working South African and Rhodesia, I learned the old saying, "One man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter," and I could see it first hand, you know. This was, the situation after Soweto, and we, it was suddenly Afrikaans--excuse me, Apartheid was thrust in front of the world in a whole new way after that. And we saw things happening on a lot of different fronts. Of course, there in the '80s [1980s] Americans, led by black Americans and their liberal allies began doing sit-ins at the South African Embassy during the [President Ronald] Reagan administration because Reagan's policy changed to one of what they called, constructive engagement. And this was viewed by liberal activists as being another sell out to the South Africans and all. Constructive engagement diplomatically proved to be a failure, but it did work in Southwest Africa in Namibia, right next door, which was a sister country, you could say, to South Africa. Separate development did work there in transferring that country from white rule, white minority rule to black rule. But South Africa itself, you didn't see the real change come about until the '80s [1980s] after the protests here in the U.S. and around the world in support of the same movement that led to the Soweto uprising. Story_ID: 37628 Speaker 1: Now, were there other black reporters there [South Africa] from anywhere? Speaker 2: Not at the time we were there. They, we didn't run into any black American reporters, well, I mean--I should say black African journalists. I can't leave out my African colleagues, for Heaven's sake. Speaker 1: So there were some African colleagues? Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, no, there's a, then and now, there were African journalists all over the continent. I mean when we--we were actually, during the time I was there, I was in South Africa, Rhodesia, Mozambique, Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia, in all those countries, there were black journalists who I knew and worked with. There were also Portuguese journalists, there were--in South Africa. There were Colored journalists because, you know, black, white and Colored were the three major race-- Speaker 1: Were the other black journalists treated with respect? I mean, you know, say if you're a Nigerian journalist, a Ghanaian journalist--I don't know if they had anybody there or not, but-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, yeah, I don't recall firsthand experience with black journalists in South Africa from other countries in those days. But if you were from another country, though, you know, carrying a passport from another country, you were, what's the best way to say it? I would say you might be treated with a bit more regard and respect that you usually afford to those people who are gonna be leaving soon anyway (laughter). Put it that way, I guess. And that's an interesting etiquette in itself. I also learned, not in South Africa, but in Tanzania, folks told me there was a tribal saying that if you, that treat a guest like royalty for three days. If they stay around for a fourth day, hand them a hoe (laughter), meaning put them to work (laughter). So, you know, and that little bit of etiquette about treating guests, I found it to be fairly universal, you know. We all treat guests with proper etiquette. You welcome the stranger, and as long as they're a stranger. When they become too familiar, then you (laughter) put 'em to work or we don't need you. So I'd say that rule probably applied there. But what was interesting though, to me, was the black South African journalists. They--at the major papers, like the 'Johannesburg Star' and others, and there were black publications too. Some of the best photography that we have today of black life in South Africa in the '50s [1950s] came from, and I'm blanking on the name of it, it was one major magazine in particular that was kind of like-- Speaker 1: Zonk. Speaker 2: Sorry,-- Speaker 1: Zonk, Z-O-N-K. Speaker 2: Boy, that sounds familiar. That might have been the-- Speaker 1: I've got copies of that at home, a big, like 'Ebony' or something. Speaker 2: Like 'Ebony', yeah, yeah, I think that's probably not exactly what I'm thinking of, but it was a sister publication 'cause they had, there were several like that which were like 'Ebony' or like 'Sepia', if you remember 'Sepia'. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: That's what they reminded me of more 'cause, you know, very large pictures and some good articles, but some really fine photography that really gave you a picture of black life. So there's a long and fine, proud journals and tradition in black South African as well as white South Africa 'cause you really did see separate development, if you will, you know. Just like in the U.S., in the old South and under segregation, you had black institutions that did grow. Story_ID: 37694 Speaker 1: You won the Edward Scott Beck Award, an internal '[Chicago] Tribune', you were saying? Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum. That's right, for the South Africa coverage, me and Ernie and Jim Younger. Speaker 1: Were your stories widely distributed in the country? Did the 'Tribune' like send them out to other papers? Speaker 2: Yeah, well, yeah, they were available to other papers. I don't know if they were that widely used outside of the 'Tribune'. I think maybe one or two of them might have been, but we still were up against the same, the same waterfall, the upstream that I was swimming when I first suggested that the 'Tribune' send some people over there. Americans then and now aren't as interested in what's going on overseas as in what's happening right down the street. And it's, so I felt, as I say, when the Soweto [South Africa] riots broke out, I felt vindicated in my initial suggestion 'cause this was my idea. We wanted this project to be successful, and the fact that while we were there engaged in it, we were already--the Soweto broke out and it became an international story. Then the 'Tribune' was ahead the game. We were, we were ahead of the beat. We got a scoop, if you will, in terms of being at the right place at the right time. But it was a--I wasn't that concerned about getting coverage outside of Chicago [Illinois] because I'd become a good Chicagoan by then. And good Chicagoans don't believe that there's really good reason to care what anybody outside Chicago (laughter) thinks. Speaker 1: Right, like Mayor Daley's comment, "That's just a national position or", you know. Speaker 2: Actually, you're thinking of Roman Pucinski-- Speaker 1: Oh, it was Pucinski, okay. Speaker 2: -- when he, former alderman, then became a Congressman, and then after a number of years of serving well in Congress, decided to go back to Chicago to be an alderman again, to run for alderman. And being already the Ward Committeeman in his ward, everybody knew he was gonna get elected alderman. But in his farewell news conference, a reporter asked him, "Why you wanna leave Congress to go back to be a, back to Chicago's City Hall, City Council", and Pucinski looked at him rather curiously and said, "Congress, that's only nation." (laughter) It was a classic story. That was and is the Chicago attitude, even now. You know, working out of the Washington Bureau, I have to persuade my friends, I'm not being punished, I wanna be here (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, so, let's see--oh, I had a question. Did you get a chance to meet Steve Biko [anti-apartheid activist in South Africa] when you were there? Speaker 2: Steven Biko was dead, wasn't he, yeah, yeah. Steven Biko, wait a minute now-- Speaker 1: Did he die just before Soweto? Speaker 2: Wait, wait, let me think for a moment. He was not dead, no. [Died in September, 1977] I had not heard of him though. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And, 'cause I was asking, 'cause I remember later on, it was after I was back in Chicago, I was asked had I heard of Steve Biko or run into him over there. And I said, no, I had not. The student movement that he was in charge of was kind of what I saw as one of the background movements. There were, his movement was kind of like the SDS [Students for a Democratic Society] or [Black] Panthers in a way over here, whereas the real action was with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] or with Dr. [Martin Luther] King and the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]. That, our focus at the time was on the ANC [African National Congress] and the PNC, which was the Pan African--oh, PAC, Pan African Council, which was--Pan African Congress, which was the rival group to the ANC. And also Chief Gatsha Buthelezi who was the Zulu chief, his one Zulu tribe outnumbered all the other tribes put together. And he was a guy who was, the man to see, (laughter) for a large part of South Africa. And he'd worked out his own separate deal with the government folks and everybody knew that anything that the ANC did, they were gonna have to deal with the Zulu nation as well 'cause if the Zulu nation didn't agree, you were gonna have civil war, which also happened after [Nelson] Mandela got out, in fact. And so, you know, that's where our focus was. So, no, I hadn't heard of Steven Biko. I just, I think maybe I'd heard of him, and it just didn't register much. Speaker 1: What about Bishop Tutu, and Boesak-- Speaker 2: Bishop Tutu, oh, yeah, Tutu and Boesak were much better known, sure. And Tutu was very well known and very well liked among all groups. He was kind of viewed as an honest broker between everybody because he was a good, holy man and viewed as non-threatening by the whites and non-threatening by the black tribal leaders as well. So yeah, he was a very prominent figure, but I really didn't meet him until he came to (laughter) Washington. I met him here in D.C. [District of Columbia], in fact. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Story_ID: 37695 Speaker 1: Well, after I came back [to Chicago, Illinois] from South Africa in '76 [1976], I was promoted to assistant city editor ['Chicago Tribune'] then, which there were about five assistant city editors. And so I was in charge of the city desk on nights and weekends, basically. Well, it was a staggered schedule, and so I would do some reporting by day sometimes, and then on the weekends I would come in and be in charge of the city desk on Saturday and Sunday. And so that was how, about that time when David Axelrod and some other promising young folks, were passing through as interns and all. I got to watch a number of them move on up in their careers as they blossomed. And so, but that was a good experience though for about five years from '76 [1976] to 1980. Speaker 2: What was a typical day like? I mean, you know, just for young people-- Speaker 1: As a-- Speaker 2: --as a journalist at the 'Chicago Tribune'? As a reporter, what was a typical day like? Speaker 1: There are no typical days, which is what's great about being a reporter (laughter). Basically, it's typical up to the point where you get to work and find out what your assignment is for the day (laughter). And-- Speaker 2: You showed up in the evening when you were the night-- Speaker 1: Right, right, depending on what shift you're working. Yeah, it is around the clock. But, yeah, there's something different. And that was even more so when I was in television because, you have a smaller staff. So TV reporters--disabuse yourself of the notion that a TV reporter only works for that minute or minute and a half you see them (laughter) on the tube 'cause I would cover on average three to five stories a day and be lucky to get on camera with one of them. But there were other stories that were--there were pictures and there was reporting that went on, but the anchor reads them while you see the visuals, you know. And so, but all those stories have reporters behind them and on. So I was very busy then. I really got to know the city, me and my crew, just buzzing all around town to go hit a dog show over here, get called over to a murder. Sometimes, we'd be the first to arrive, and you'd see-I'll never forget, one time on the South Side, there had been a chase which ended in this car being upended, and this Brother trying to get out of the car, climbs up through the window, and sees the cops and like a fool, starts shooting at them. And, of course, they mowed him down. And by the time we get there, he's hanging upside down, eyes opened, you know, bloody chest there--good looking suit that he had on and a whole bunch of onlookers around there, talking they shot him in cold blood, they shot him in cold blood, blah, blah, blah. We didn't know if a riot was gonna be going on or what, just like you see on TV in other words, you know, the various, you know, NYPD Blue or whatever else, you know. But those were rather remarkable times too. I--the funny thing about being a daily reporter, a daily news reporter on stories like that, you know, general assignment, local news, Number One, it's really important to the viewers. The ratings tell you, you know, local reporter covering these shoot-'em ups and fires, our ratings are two or three times higher than these Washington big wigs covering the White House and all this other stuff here. But for the reporter who has big goals, dreams of covering the big history-making stories, you wanna fight the boredom, fight the routine. You, rather look for something bizarre to happen that just makes this more interesting because so much of this happens, and it could really be deadening. Nothing sickens me and upsets me more than just the high carnage of young, black kids, just kids, forget, you know, black, white, Latino. Unfortunately, in places like Chicago [Illinois], they're mostly black and increasingly Latino, but just kids killing each other. It's incredible. I mean in one damn year, more black kids kill other kids than the Ku Klux Klan killed over the course of about thirty years. And it's like this is something that just goes on and it's, and I'm still obsessed with this. I was talking with a Justice Department guy today about a conference on youth violence coming up here in Washington [District of Columbia]. And so I got to see a lot of that or the aftermath of it or the conditions that lead to it. And it's still going on. And this is something that I've been, one thing, as a columnist, I've been, you know, working with trying to get more stories about this. But all that time I was a reporter, I really wanted to be a columnist so I could get a chance to write about some way to try to stop the cycle this sort of thing so that all this bad news isn't so routine, so that you could do more than just cover the carnage, but be able to talk about why this has happened and what can we do to stop it from happening. Story_ID: 37696 Speaker 1: So in terms of columnists in Chicago [Illinois] in those days, I'd just arrived around, in the late '70s [1970s], and I remember this. Lu Palmer had the 'Black Express', but that, I think that had faded out, but he-- Speaker 2: He started the 'Black Express' after he quit the paper, quit the 'Daily News' in frustration and ran into that problem that journalists of all colors run into. Most journalists make better journalists than business people. But in order for your publication to succeed or your broadcast operation, you need to have a good business person, and the 'Black Express' never had that. And that was the real problem there. And it's not the first one. Gosh, it just recently happened with the 'Chicago News Cooperative' that a former '[Chicago] Tribune' people got started-- Speaker 1: With "Lou's Notebook" on the radio-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --twice in the morning and-- Speaker 2: And that was very successful 'cause he was, Lou was a great commentator. And he also had a talk show too, of and on for years. But that-- Speaker 1: On the radio, right. Speaker 2: --that all gave him the prominence that enabled him, along with Vernon [Jarett; also a HistoryMaker] and Renault Robinson and other folks to get the Harold Washington--actually, we're about getting to that point really, in my life to talk about that 'cause I, as I say, I was city editor in 1980--well, actually, 1980, 1979. In '79 [1979] and '80 [1980], I was an investigative reporter. That's when I won another award with a couple of colleagues called "The Black Tax" that looked, the Illinois UPI Award, called a "Black Tax"-- Speaker 1: Now, this is 1980? Speaker 2: 1980. Okay, let's we're gonna cover that in a minute. Speaker 1: Well, it's about that time 'cause (laughter) I just talked about city editor and then went to the-- Speaker 2: I didn't wanna skip over the fact that--okay, the black commentators. We had Bill Berry on TV, I think and he had a TV show. There are other black TV shows then when they had to have the--the stations had to comply with FCC [Federal Communications Commission] to have these community affairs shows. Speaker 1: Well, they've always had to do that, but those shows weren't hosted by blacks till 1967, I think. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: I know the show Vernon [Jarrett] was on called, "For Blacks Only" on Channel 7 was either the first or the second. But, yeah, there was a syndrome that you had--public affairs shows in those days almost had to have, you would think it was an FCC reg [regulation] that you had to have a public affairs show hosted by a black person (laughter). But they were, but, yeah, there were shows hosted by black folks because there was, not only was there a what, goodness of their hearts or pressure, affirmative action pressure, but there was a commercial value to it. I mean you got a country that--country? You've got a metropolitan area that was something like between 20 and 30 percent black, got a city that was over 30 percent black. And you got a TV station and you ain't got no black folks, visible black folks? You'd better (laughter). You wanna sell advertising to these folks or whatever, you got--and that same thing with Hispanics and other groups, Asians, etc., any group that's rising in prominence. Everybody wants to see their community represented, especially in a city like Chicago. Story_ID: 37697 Speaker 1: But what was interesting to me was when I was working in TV between '80 [1980] and '84 [1984], it had been almost a rule, understood that if a black person was hosting a show, it had to be a public affairs show. It was not a show that was expected to make money. And you know who broke that? That great civil rights leader, Oprah Winfrey (laughter), not as a civil rights leader, but simply as someone who was available at a time when Channel 7 was trying to have a show that could compete with Phil Donahue who was at our station at Channel 2. And they had a show called "AM Chicago", and it was a half hour show, and they had a couple of, two or three prominent hosts, Rob Weller, Sandy Dennis was her last name, if I'm not mistaken, who had hosted it and just couldn't make a dent in Donohue, for Heaven's sake. And the somebody at Channel 7 got this idea about hiring this black woman from Baltimore [Maryland] who was doing well in that market, named Oprah Winfrey. Oprah who, you know. They started this promotion campaign, Oprah who? (laughter) And we were over at Channel 2, and I said, you know, her face was on buses and this kind of thing. And I met her at that time because I hanging out, I was, what, a single man then, I was hanging out at 'Faces' disco on, in the Rush Street district. It was a popular disco at that time. And this woman I knew from Channel 7 asked me if I'd like to meet Oprah Winfrey? I said, oh, the woman they've been advertising and all this kind of thing, you know. So I met her that night, really nice, very charming and I, I didn't--I wished her luck. I wished her well. I said, I hope you do well and not too well. I'm at your competing station, but (laughter) glad to have you here in town. And I was thinking to myself, I hope she does well because it's terrible to have to come to town with all this publicity in advance. I remember one or two newspapers columnists who had been given this tremendous promo campaign on the side of buses and billboards before they'd ever written an actual column. And that's a terrible way to start a column, as I later learned the hard way myself when, not the hard way, but I learned in the sense of, when I became a columnist, there was no fanfare. I said, good (laughter) 'cause it takes you a year or two to develop a voice as a columnist. Don't just throw somebody out there and expect them to suddenly be, you know, marvelous and universally well loved from Day One. So any way, that was a big difference there, I'd say. So I've always been grateful to Oprah. When she started doing that show, she showed Chicago--'cause this had already happened in other markets around the country, where you had commercial shows with black hosts, and they'd made money. But Chicago never had it and didn't think it was gonna happen. And it was, it shocked everybody when she started doing her show, and you saw white ladies out of the bungalow belt up there crying on Oprah's shoulder just like the black women and everybody else, you know. She transcended all of that. And you know what happened around the country, all of a sudden it seemed like now everybody had to be either black or Latino (laughter). That's when Geraldo Rivera had his show-- Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: --and you (laughter) had, there was a whole slew of people-- Speaker 2: Oh, God, it was a whole lot everywhere, yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, you either had to be a woman or a person of color or preferably both (laughter) in order to host a daytime talk show. Jerry Springer was a remarkable exception, in fact, and that's a whole other story. But it was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: And Montel Williams and there's another, a black woman who was a doctor. I can't remember her name. Story_ID: 37698 Speaker 1: So at the '[Chicago] Tribune, besides you, it's Monroe Anderson and Lyn-- Speaker 2: Leanita [McClain], my wife. Speaker 1: Yeah, right. Speaker 2: My first wife. Speaker 1: And she had a, she was one of the first black columnists, I guess for the 'Tribune'. Speaker 2: She was "the" first--I'm sorry. She was the first black female columnist at the 'Tribune'. She was the first black woman on the editorial board and the first black member of the 'Tribune' editorial board. And I was the second. So it was like, and we've had others since then. But, yeah, Monroe was there at the time. I mean there were a lot of folks who would, were there, (unclear) through or a number of whom stuck around. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I'm the senior black now (laughter). I'm the senior almost everybody now, in fact. I guess it's--there's maybe two or three other people who've got more seniority in the editorial department there, meaning all the news features and all that, department than I do. Speaker 1: Now, you got married in the late '70s [1970s], I guess? Speaker 2: '74 [1974]-- Speaker 1: '74 [1974], that's what it says-- Speaker 2: --I got married, Leanita and I married. She came to the paper as an intern, and then she was hired full time. And we got married in '74 [1974]. We divorced in 1980, and she sadly committed suicide in 1984. It was a very sad drama because she was doing so well. She had been suffering-- Speaker 1: She's young and had-- Speaker 2: Yeah, she was thirty-two, thirty-two years old when she died. And it was, and she'd only been, what, about three months earlier, she'd been named one of 'Glamour Magazine's' top ten professional women in the country. And it was, and she was not only writing columns, she was getting, you know, lots of speaking engagements. She was getting awards from various folks. She was really creating quite a stir, and it was a--also, her, the essays that she wrote were stunning in so many cases. And I mean, during the, what, Harold Washington campaign, she wrote a piece for the 'Washington Post' that was headlined, the 'Washington Post' headline "How Chicago Taught Me to Hate White People." And the 'Post', bless their hearts, is great for sensational headlines (laughter). It wasn't, she never actually said she hated white people in the piece, but she did hate white racism that was popping up during the Harold Washington campaign, and she had some very clear examples of it and talked about how angry it made her. And it upset a lot of white folks in Chicago [Illinois], clearly the Chicago City Council. They passed a resolution that condemned her for her--for making Chicago look bad across the country, which is only--I mean if you wanna be in a controversy, that's the kind to be in. It's much better than the Rush Limbaugh, Don Imus or some of these people (laughter). Here's one she could say, you know, she was condemned for what she actually said and that she said and believed it on principle. Story_ID: 37699 Speaker 1: Well, what is there--can you give us your version of what happened with her, I mean in terms of--'cause a lot of people in Chicago have like, have turned it over and turned it over-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, because she was so prominent. And it was like--I wrote about it again recently, after Don Cornelius died because it reminded of how shocking this kind of thing can be and especially in the black community where the myth still lives that black folks don't commit suicide. And Leanita had been, I mean her depression, which I didn't understand at the time and neither did other people who knew her, her depression was really what undermined her desire to be married anymore. She was just completely restless about that and wanted to get out and find herself and all the rest of this. And I wasn't sure what to do. I mean we separated for a while and we got back together again. And it was, and we finally separated again. And I said, you know, if we do it again now, you know, this is really it. We can't just keep going back and forth. And she agreed to that. But we still remained friends. And it was like--me and Monroe Anderson, who you mentioned and a few other folks, as I say, half a dozen of us who knew her well, knew that she was having this real problem. But she was also a terrific actor, as a lot of depressed people are. In public, she could put on a big bright smile and just be as bright and chipper and glad to see yah as anybody could. So hardly anybody had a clue of the torment that was going on inside. Speaker 1: That's clinical depression, you think? Speaker 2: Yeah, it was. Speaker 1: Was she taking medication for it? Speaker 2: Yeah, but the medication back then--it breaks my heart to see how--I'm gratified with the scientific advances since then, but it also breaks my heart because every time I see a new anti-depression medication come along, I think oh, if only she had had that back then. What she had then was very primitive compared to what's available now. And so I, like many other suicide survivors, have become a campaigner for people. You know, if you're feeling really blue, you know, you got the blues and it won't go away, do not hesitate to get help anywhere you can. Your preacher, a shrink, a counselor, you know. Don't be ashamed or embarrassed or don't think, well, I can deal with this, blah, blah, blah. It's a, I've learned a lot. And it's, like I say, there's this myth in the community that black folks don't commit suicide. And Leanita and I used to, we used to joke darkly about this, you know, yeah, you can't kill yourself by jumping out of a basement window. That was the Dick Gregory line. And it's still true that people believe this. That's why it was so shocking when Don Cornelius committed suicide. And a lot of people wanted to jump immediately to conspiracy theories, you know, did somebody do him in and blah, blah, blah, which is natural. There were people who felt that way about Leanita too because you're looking for some way to explain all this. But it's, even Alvin Poussaint, at the time, Dr. Alvin Poussaint, Harvard [University] psychiatrist and all, great expert, he was rather bemused by how this could happen with Leanita, somebody like this. He'd seen it happen before, but it didn't hit him personally until I think it was a brother of his or a cousin. I know right in his own family, it hit him a few years later. And he wrote a book, coauthored with Amy Alexander about this, that--about black suicide. And it's called 'Till I Lay My Burden Down'. And he wrote about how he didn't really understand, begin to understand until it hit close to home. And that happened with me and a lot of other folks. Story_ID: 37700 Speaker 1: And one thing I could say that happens with suicide survivors, that made me feel better was that if you were able to get help for them, you feel guilty about getting help for them. If you didn't get help for them, you feel guilty about. Either way you feel guilty, and it was like, she had help, but she wouldn't stick with it. One day, in fact, she [Leanita McClain; Page's first wife] was making a guest appearance on ABC station in Chicago [Illinois], and I get a phone call from the producer, frantic. She said that Leanita just passed out back stage after the show was over and had fainted dead away. And she knew I was her ex-husband, and I was the only person that she knew who knew her. She called me right away. And I said, I'll be right over, and I went over, by the time I got there, she had come to. And she was sitting there drinking water and all, and I, and I said, let me take you to the hospital. And she said, no, I'm all right, just take me home. So I took her down to her house in Hyde Park, and I got there, and I looked in the refrigerator, and there was nothing in the refrigerator except like some water, I think and one carton of milk. And I said, you haven't been shopping, which was not like her. And she said, I haven't got any food. I don't have any money. I can't afford it, and which was absurd. I mean she was paying for this house which she and her boyfriend were going to buy together. But it turned out he coped out on her, and she went ahead and bought it anyway with her own money. And so it was more house than she could comfortably afford. But she could still get food. She could manage all of this. She could turn to me for help and other folks. But she hadn't done this 'cause--it wasn't the money. It was just, she was just depressed. No matter what she did, she was just really depressed and really felt awful. She even, when the 'Glamour Magazine' award came, I remember it was a beautiful crystal trophy, and she was sitting there in her living room holding this trophy and tears coming down her cheeks saying, "People are so good to me; why am I so unhappy?" You know, she just--that's the frustration for people who are clinically depressed because you're unhappy, and there's just no explanation for it. And you can't do anything about it, and it's just got to be an awful, awful condition to be in. And I've had it described to me by so many different folks in so many different ways. Story_ID: 37701 Speaker 1: But it is true though that, ironically, as I said in my column about Cornelius [Don], that black folks do have a lower suicide rate than white. And since Leanita's [McClain; Page's first wife] death, and not because of it, but in the way, but during the last thirty years, the Centers for Disease Control now are keeping better statistics on suicide by race and ethnicity and more studies have been done, seriously looking at it. And it's interesting that a lot of, like with black youths, they have a lower suicide rate than white youths, but a lot of that may be suicide by another name. You know, many of the--much of the youth violence that we know of may be actually a different kind of suicide where a kid just gives up on living and deliberately walks into a situation where they're gonna get shot. Speaker 2: That's interesting because-- Speaker 1: I'm sorry. Speaker 2: --you hear youth, you know, I don't expect to live. I expect to be, to blow up and to get my stuff or whatever-- Speaker 1: Exactly. Speaker 2: --and then, and be out of here. Speaker 1: We have a generation of kids who feel like, you know, they're not gonna live past twenty [years; age] anyway, just I'll be on--I know one young man who had been shot but lived. And after he turned twenty, he turned his life around (laughter) because he said he never expected to reach twenty. And he was so shocked and really surprised by that. And nineteen is a good age, you know, thirteen and nineteen are intervention ages, I'm told, you know, the kind of ages where a little portal opens up with young people, especially boys where they are more receptive to guiding voices than other times. And that will happen, but what's remarkable though is that, what black women do have one of the lowest suicide rates. It was like white men, white women, black men, black women, and the only gender group, gender ethnic group that has a higher suicide rate, what, the white--I'm sorry, Asian women have a higher suicide rate than Asian men. But in other groups, Native American, black, white, Hispanic, the men tend to have a higher suicide rate than the women. These are all--these are interesting things. And it's like, there's been a lot of interesting talk in the psycho--especially, among, in the black psychology of the psychiatry community about what is it in black culture that may hold the suicide rate down. And part of it may be the blues (laughter), the music, the culture that created the blues has other avenues for venting, black worship services, the way we, the call and response and the very evocative styles of worship that we have, and also a very deep-seated belief in the Lord. And my mom [Maggie Lee Williams Page] and dad [Clarence H. Page] used to always say, well, you know, it's God's will, you know. So you get a certain peace from that and the belief that you don't have that much control or element of control and that if you can tell yourself that, well, the Lord meant for this to happen, it can make you feel better. And I know when our son went off to college and my wife was just worried sick, I said, well, as my mother used to say when I went off to school, "He's in the Lord's hands now." (laughter) I felt like Mom was smiling up there somewhere (laughter) 'cause I know how that feels now. Story_ID: 37702 Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about 'The Black Tax', a series of articles you did about things that black folks have to-- Speaker 2: Yeah, me and Monroe Anderson and Bill, Bill--I'm having one of those little brain bombs here (laughter), on Bill's last name, goodness (laughter). He's teaching at the University of Illinois now. It's gonna come to me, but anyway, your question? Speaker 1: Yeah, the Black Tax, now, that series of articles. Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we, the idea was to go out and see if folks in the black community were paying more for their goods and services than other Chicagoans were and in black communities of Chicago [Illinois], primarily West side and South Side. Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute. Black folks say this all the time, the barbershop, the beauty shop, in church, after church, at home, we pay--then some people say, well, that's just conspiracy theory, you know. Speaker 2: Well, it's, some conspiracies are real. And conspiracy is a bunch of folks meeting in quiet and secret or in confidence, making plans that are gonna effect other people's lives without their knowing it, yeah. You know, these are wide open conspiracies, like insurance redlining. We did a lot of work on that, which is essentially--it's market driven. It's in the public. It's legal that if you live in certain zip codes, you're gonna pay a higher insurance rate for your car and your house than people who live in another zip code. And these zip code ratings are based on local crime rates and accident rates and fire rates. And it's discriminatory-- Speaker 1: And they correspond to-- Speaker 2: I'm sorry. Speaker 1: They correspond to race, right? Speaker 2: They correspond to race, yeah. And they don't, you know if anybody wanted to do a racial conspiracy to mark off communities that were black, say, or Hispanic, they could do that and the lines wouldn't be much different than the lines by zip code and by crime and fire rate, etc., etc. And that, the question is, is it fair and does it actually suppress the property values unnecessarily and does it charge people extra unnecessarily. And that's what we were really concerned about because what we found was, you know, like areas of Hyde Park, for example or Chatham, Avalon, South Shore. There were communities--these were all Chicago communities that are known for having a lot of middle-class residents, you know, lower crime rate or at least no higher than a comparable white community or white neighborhood, fire rate, the kind of things that you would be charging for--car accidents, etc., the kind of things you'd be actuarially charging a higher rate for were they actually present, and found out they really weren't, that these, this--doing it by zip code was largely driven by habit, going back decades. And nobody had taken time to change it. So, yeah, there were a lot of people who were, who had very good--who not only had very good personal safety records with their cars and fire records, etc., with their homes or crime rates and all that were favorable, but that they were being charged extra anyway because they were in the same zip code. And so that, something we were impressed by later on, we went out to stores to look at the quality of the merchandise, especially grocery stores and found that it wasn't as bad as in the 1960s when Jesse Jackson led his boycotts against the old Red Rooster Supermarket chain which was selling inferior quality meat and other goods in black areas, but that a lot of the independent merchants weren't--and I mean just independent, free-standing grocery stores, the quality was just as bad as the old Red Rooster days, but they didn't, and the local residents didn't have alternatives to go to. They didn't have a Wal-Mart down the street or even any of the other major firms Dominos [Dominick's] or other major supermarkets. And that began to change here in more recent years as some superstore sized drugstores and groceries and all opened up in a lot of these areas and with gentrification, etc. But at that time, we were the first since the '60s [1960s] to really put a spotlight on this. And so it was a series, we like to think, did some good because we did get people to start thinking differently about the way they did their insurance rates. Some other aspects with the legislature, we were able to get legislatures to take a new look at redlining. And so that was a very helpful piece. Right on the heels of that, I went off to work in television. So (laughter), I kind of put that behind me then, and I was over working at Channel 2 when I got the news that we had won the UPI [United Press International] Award. And so I got this plaque after I'd already left the '[Chicago] Tribune' and gone over to TV. But I still cherish it. Story_ID: 37703 Speaker 1: All right, so, yeah, so you all proved--you looked at redlining. What about housing? Do we pay more for houses? Speaker 2: Well, house price, actually, less for house prices but more for house insurance (laughter). And we were paying less for the house prices because the home value was depressed by those same standards that were inflating the insurance prices. So we did show--that's a reverse tax in terms of you are gonna pay less say on your monthly mortgage, but your resale value is gonna be less too. So your investment is less. So while you may have more income, you're gonna have less wealth. And we know now in more recent years, now, people pay more attention to wealth and seeing that even among really affluent black folks by income, they have less wealth folks do. So there's a lot of talk about that in the black community now. And we saw some of the roots of it there in 'The Black Tax' series. Story_ID: 37704 Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and the time it [Page's investigative series, 'The Black Tax' in the 'Chicago Tribune'] came out, a lot of people really weren't conscious of this, I mean really being an issue. It was talked about, but-- Speaker 2: No, and I think part of it was because--I mean looking back with the eyes of 2012, looking back, those were pretty good times for black folks in a lot of ways. Now, there was a recession going on which wasn't good. We'd been through, what was it called, "Stagflation." We had [President] Gerald Ford with his "Whip Inflation Now" buttons and all. But if you look at black folks, the trajectory of black folks from the 1960s to 1990, we were moving up, as the 'Jefferson's' said, we were moving on up. I remember being a young reporter, young black reporter in the '70s [1970s] when the Chicago Association of Black Journalists was getting started and all. And we were a nervous bunch. I mean we had come into these downtown media on the heels of riots, feeling like, you know, this is foreign territory. Some of us were starting to move up and feel the resentment of some white folks who were wondering if we really belonged there or we were competition and all. And a lot of that was exaggerated in our heads, but you didn't know (laughter) as, who was it? Mark Twain or somebody said, "Just 'cause you're paranoid, don't mean somebody's not out to get you (laughter) 'cause there's somebody," somebody probably is. And so we were so nervous, but I look back on it now, you know, we were--black folks on the whole who had a college diploma were moving up, opportunities were going up. And you look at the numbers now, it's quite remarkable how much progress we made just in the '70s [1970s] and the '80s [1980s]. We went from, what, a poverty rate in the black community of a little over 60 percent in 1965 to around 30 percent in 1985. You know, in other words, we cut our poverty rate in half. We doubled our, our households in the black middle class, if you will. I defy you to find any other ethnic group on the planet that advanced that fast. And so there were, things were actually moving up for us, improving even while we were being, we were very wary about continuing discrimination, and were we still being cheated or somebody trying to sandbag us on the way up, etc. I think that's one reason why the black tax didn't get more attention. And so it was kind of, we saw it as a story sitting there. Nobody really looked at this since the early, to mid-'60s [1960s]. And so it was kind of sitting there, and we went after it, and it really created a stir among black folks. They were really (laughter) delighted to see us do it 'cause we confirmed so many suspicions. But we also gave people a better--we also knocked down some of our own suspicions. There were some problems we thought we'd find that we didn't. There were others that we weren't expecting them, that we did find. Story_ID: 37705 Speaker 1: Okay, now, 1980, you joined WBBM, right? Speaker 2: Right, um-hum. Speaker 1: Now, this is the era of Walter Jacobson and Bill Kurtis-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --the top-rated news broadcast in the evening, I believe, in Chicago [Illinois]? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Oh, it wasn't. Speaker 2: No, the Channel 7 was-- Speaker 1: Channel 7? Speaker 2: --was still the top rated on most evenings. We were the top rated though whenever there was any big story going on (laughter). Whenever there was a blizzard or something (laughter) or any kind of a major story, when people really wanted to get their news, they came to us. But, yeah, Channel 7 was still our biggest competition. And they were still wearing the green jackets and the "Eyewitness News" slogan, which we deadpanned as the "Eye witless news" and our format was, "It's not pretty, but it's real." We went the other direction. We took out the fancy set, and I think we were the first station in the country to just use the bear newsroom behind the anchors, people working, gathering news. And we, it was times like the Harold Washington election that we were Number One, you know, when there was a big story going on, people would turn to us. And that was something we were really proud of, and I was proud to be part of that team. And that, that is what made me a political expert nationally, was what began initially as being assigned to go cover what was Jesse Jackson's protesting, it's Jane Byrne and her CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] and Board of Ed [Education] appointments. Speaker 1: Chicago Fest. Speaker 2: Chicago Housing Authority and the Board of Education. She had, there were two seats opened, and she filled them with white ethnics instead of the black folks, and Jesse [Jackson] go mad. And it was on his radio show, a caller called in--it wasn't his show. It was another show, he was a guest every Sunday morning on this show, on the old WBMX [radio]. And a caller said, "Reverend, why don't you lead a boycott of Mayor Byrne's Chicago Fest" and that'll really get her 'cause she loves that Chicago Fest up there at Navy Pier and all that. And you could hear Jesse's voice, going, yeah, yeah, yeah [louder], let's have a boycott of Chicago Fest (laughter), you know. So it started on that radio show, you know, and by the end of the day, there were people buzzing about, they're gonna boycott Chicago Fest. And so it was kind of like putting your career down--putting your reputation down on the line. What if this boycott fails? But as it turned out, Chicago folks put a lot of pressure on the main performers, and I remember when Stevie Wonder decided that he wasn't gonna perform, that turned things around. And I think somebody appealed to him reminding him of Ray Charles, who boycotted a segregated auditorium down South back in the '60s [1960s]. And 'Earth, Wind and Fire' cancelled, and boy, when the--then they started just to fall like dominos. And when that happened, I think word got out to black folks especially, that this is serious. And when the prime magnets are quitting, then the Chic flips. It is now Chic, instead of to go to Chicago Fest, it is Chic not to go to Chicago Fest (laughter). So there were "Boycott Chicago Fest" t-shirts and this kind of thing coming out, and I was sent over there. It was like a slow news day. It was Saturday, but Chicago Fest was starting. And we had a skeleton crew, and the assignment desk said, "Hey, Clarence, take a crew and go over and see how Chicago Fest is working." I remember going over there. I was amazed because I, I remember the first thing I think I saw was, was Alpha Phi Alpha out there doing step dancing out there and chanting against the Chicago Fest (laughter) and all and all these other black folks out there marching in circles, Lu Palmer and Jesse and others. And there were white people walking by curiously, coming in from the 'burbs [suburbs], and we only found one black family, that whole afternoon that went in, and I tried to interview 'em. They didn't wanna talk (laughter). They said, that's okay, we just wanted to see what's going on blah, blah, blah. That was it. And I mean it really turned out to be a brilliant move because it was so visible, TV cameras, and Jackson [Jesse] was always very conscious of the power of TV. Panning the cameras around told the story in itself. All you saw were white people. The only black people were those who were working there, and, and the black folks who were picketing out front, and, boy, the word went out. I remember by the next day, somebody, some enterprising person had made up t-shirts that said, "Honky Fest" (laughter), they were selling over there to white people (laughter). It was like a white guy who made them and white people were buying them as a gag. Very few were wearing them, but suddenly the protest became the story. And by the time this was over, people were talking about--Lu Palmer was leading the effort, people were talking about having a black mayor, a campaign for a black mayor to overthrown Jane Byrne. Speaker 1: And remember the slogan? Speaker 2: Exactly, what was the slogan? Speaker 1: "We will see in '83 [1983]." Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, and Lu [Palmer] made that up. And it was like, and this had followed what, "What are we gonna do in '82 [1982?]? There was the election campaign of Paul Simon against Chuck Percy. And Jane Byrne. And Lu Palmer had backed Simon with a slogan, and Simon also hired David Axelrod too. He'd just left the '[Chicago] Tribune' at that time. This is a small town. Boy, you look around. It's always the same people. You know, I love it. Story_ID: 37706 Speaker 1: And anyway, the committee to--the campaign to elect a black mayor [in Chicago, Illinois] followed that. And so when they were having their rally--I forget which church it was, out on the South Side, Jesse Jackson, Lu Palmer, Renault Robinson and the others, were gathering, I was sent out to cover that for Channel 2 and subsequent events that occurred, I was covering them. And then-- Speaker 2: The plebiscites I think too, to select candidates (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, you could talk--I mean it was all kinds of steps, yeah, plebiscites, etc. They were trying to get Roland Burris to run. He turned them down, said, Chicago ain't ready to elect a black mayor. Hah, hah, so much for his political instincts. Then they finally talked Harold Washington into it, and all along the way, I was covering this stuff. And so, as this story began to rise in prominence, so did I, 'cause I was, my story--as his challenge to Jane Byrne became more serious, especially after that first debate when he outdebated Jane Byrne and that young fellow, Richie Daley there, who had been viewed as her principal challenger, they--the next day, you know, those blue Harold Washington buttons popped up all over town, another great TV story, you know, 'cause just this visual. TV was visual. That's one thing I learned going from newspapers to TV. If you haven't got pictures, you haven't got a story. But if you do have pictures, you don't need a story (laughter), 'cause the pictures will tell the story. And that was, all along, this was a very visual, very TV story. And near the end now, the last three weeks, the--instead of me being viewed as the--and the Harold Washington campaign, being viewed as this side story, suddenly, it's moving into center stage, becoming a main event. And so suddenly, I'm leading the evening news now, along with the senior reporters. And, you know, from new kid on the block now to political expert. When it became a national story, CBS Morning News and the other national operations, especially on the weekends when they were short, they'd get me to do the story or a special on the radio. And when the talk shows needed journalists to talk about it, then I started doing the talk shows. So it was a, suddenly, I was reminded, my daddy [Clarence H. Page] said "An expert is any damn fool 300 miles from home" (laughter), and I was 312 miles from Middletown, Ohio in Chicago and suddenly, I'm a political expert. And then, you know, like I said, my name started to rise with TV and all. And then I got invited back to the '[Chicago] Tribune' near the middle of 1984, after Leanita [McClain; Page's first wife] passed. And I was, Jack Fore (ph.) asked me if I'd be interested in joining the editorial board. And I said, will you let me have a couple of columns a week, and you've got a deal 'cause I always wanted to write a column. And that is when I became a columnist. So it was a, my TV adventure was over at the right time. I felt like it was getting to a point where I was getting tired of being awakened at four o'clock in the morning to go out with a TV crew to cover a house that just blew up. And I wanted to do more of the stories that looked at why are houses blowing up or why are we having these problems and all. So the timing was very good. Story_ID: 37707 Speaker 1: So in terms of the [Harold] Washington campaign, I mean did it take you by surprise as it seemed to do the rest of the Chicago [Illinois] media. I know that the look on Andy Shaw's face and some of the other-- Speaker 2: Which event are you talking about? Speaker 1: The election of Harold-- Speaker 2: Well, remember an election campaign-- Speaker 1: Each step seemed to be a shock and-- Speaker 2: An election campaign is a series of events. I don't care whether you're running for mayor or you're running for president, you know. I just did the introduction to a new edition of 'Fire on the Prairie', Gary Rivlin's book about Harold Washington's election. And he asked me if I could write something comparing, you know, talking about the significance of Harold Washington to [President] Barack Obama so he can do this, get more of a national appeal for the book. And I said, I can write you a story about how Barack Obama's election followed the same pattern as Harold Washington's election, the same kind of events, you know. Harold was up against a woman with the power of incumbency and white populous candidate who, you know, Richie Daley, out of the bungalow belt and the son of the late mayor [Richard J. Daley]. Barack Obama was up against Hillary Clinton and-- Speaker 1: Edwards. Speaker 2: Help me, thank you, John Edwards-- Speaker 1: John Edwards. Speaker 2: --a populous, popular candidate with, and a former senator and all. And Obama was viewed as the, what, maybe the spoiler, you know, like Harold Washington was viewed initially. Now, but the main event is this white man and white woman and, you got this rising, bright, black, bright, articulate black person here who, it just makes the story interesting. And then at a certain point, suddenly, this bright, articulate one becomes the prime challenger. And then another point comes and suddenly, he's the frontrunner, you know. I mean, there's, through the events, I just paralleled it, you know, between those two, just pointing out how many events occurred. And, yeah, all along the line people got surprised. Well, you know, they--what Dwight Eisenhower said, "War will always amaze you." I say the same thing about political campaigns, you know. That's what makes them so much fun to cover 'cause there's always surprises. I mean look at the 2012 campaign with--Obama ain't even in it as far as running for anything, but the Republicans all along the line have been surprising people every kind (laughter) of way, you know. And it's, that's why I love 'em, you know, as a journalist because that's news, you know, when things aren't going the way they're always supposed to be going. And that constantly surprises, but, yeah, you know, Harold Washington surprised people. He surprised me. I'd be lying to you if I didn't say that it wasn't until election night, the primary election night when I was there at Harold Washington's, at the old McCormick Inn there, at Harold Washington's campaign night headquarters-- Speaker 1: Donnelly Hall, yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah, wait a minute, that Donnelly Hall was in McCormick Place, isn't it? Speaker 1: Yes, that's up there, yeah-- Speaker 2: Well, that was not the primary night. That was the general election. Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Speaker 2: That was Donnelly Hall. Story_ID: 37708 Speaker 1: Now, the primary night, he [Harold Washington] was in the ballroom at the old McCormick Inn Hotel [Chicago, Illinois]-- Speaker 2: Oh. Speaker 1: --which they've torn down, you know, years ago now. And I was, I remember when that hotel opened, I was up there to interview the Temptations up in one of their hotel rooms. And then how many years later, I watch them tear the damn thing down. So you just built it, you know. But in the meantime, it was the Harold Washington--I always remember that. When they tore that hotel down, I said, daggone, you're tearing down my life, you know, 'cause there were so many events that took place in that building, including that one. That was, that night was like the night Joe Louis beat Max Schmeling 'cause I--all my life, my mom [Maggie Lee Williams Page] and dad [Clarence H. Page], my uncles, grandpa, had said, "Oh, the night Joe Louis beat Max Schmeling, people poured out into the streets." Well, that happened the night Harold Washington--. I always wondered what was that like. And the night of Harold Washington's victory and the night of Barack Obama's victory, that's what happened, here in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia]. Now, we got Twitter (laughter). So people were pouring out 'cause they were tweeting each, ooh, ooh, you know. No, hundreds of people in front of the White House all of a sudden, you know. And, but that, but no, on election night, there, they--about half the votes had been counted. I was busy there working on coverage. I looked up at the board. I looked up at the numbers, you know, Jane Byrne, Richie Daley, Harold Washington, I'm looking at the numbers, saying, "Damn, he might really win this thing." (laughter) All of a sudden the reality is kind of hitting me. I'll never forget that. I looked at the numbers. I couldn't deny it anymore 'cause I--in my heart of hearts, I wanted him to win. It was gonna be a great story, and, but I said, knowing how I am, if I root for anybody, it's gonna jinx 'em. So I just don't root for anybody (laughter). I don't make any predictions. I try to avoid that kind of thing. And, but half way through that evening, I looked over there, and I (unclear) a good job of convincing myself that Harold ain't a sure thing or he ain't gonna win or whatever, preparing for him not to win. And I was really surprised when I was hit by the reality, yep, there's no denying it now. Yeah, it, he surprised a lot of people. And, you know what? It's a good thing he did because if people had expected him to be a contender at the beginning, Jane Byrne and Richard Daley's campaigns would have thrown some roadblocks in his way like they did after he got the nomination. And you saw those ads, you know, on TV, "Vote Epton for Mayor before It's too Late." You would have had that stuff earlier. But quite the opposite happened in the primary. Byrne and Daley, neither of them thought Harold was gonna be a real competitor. But both of them wanted to get the black votes after Harold quit. And so that's why they were being real nice to Harold (laughter) and laid hands off. Bernie Epton, according to his brother, Sol Epton, a prominent judge, thought that Byrne was going to win, and that's why, you know, the Republicans always have a hard time getting somebody to run for mayor. And so he decided to throw his hat in the ring, just to hold up the party's honor. But also that he thought he had a shot at being the great hope, the Great White Hope for blacks against Jane Byrne, that Byrne would win and black voters would be looking for an alternative 'cause this has happened before, you know, when they got mad at Daley, the elder Daley. And so ironically, Bernie Epton got in the race with the idea--and remember, he's a former Hyde Parker. He knew a lot of black folks. They liked him. They knew him. My wife grew up in Hyde Park. She knew Bernie Epton and his family and just loved them, felt that they were great people. Speaker 2: Jeff's a liberal journalist, his son, you know. Speaker 1: Oh, he is? Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Where? Speaker 2: He was in Dayton [Ohio], believe it or not. Speaker 1: No kidding. Speaker 2: For a black paper in Dayton, was an editor of a black newspaper in Dayton. Speaker 1: Bernie Epton's son? Speaker 2: Yeah, Jeff Epton, yeah. Speaker 1: I didn't know that. Speaker 2: Yeah. Story_ID: 37709 Speaker 1: While we're talking about it because I think, I have something of a unique perspective on Bernie Epton [politician who served in the Illinois House of Representatives. In 1983 he lost a close and contentious election for Mayor of Chicago] just from the standpoint of being his favorite black reporter. (laughter) He was, well, for one thing, I was about the only black reporter covering the mayor's race at that point. And we had a good relationship. And every, on the weekends especially, but, well, during the week too. But sometimes I'd go to this Bernie Epton event, and, you know, the media scrum would gather. And Bernie would say out loud, "Where's Clarence? I want Clarence right up here, right up here in front", 'cause he liked me. And I think he also--I don't know if it was deliberate but, by him or his staff, but it didn't hurt his image for there to be a black person within camera range (laughter), not just a bunch of white faces around there. But it was rather poignantly ironic that, you know, we got along quite well as far as, you know, newsmaker reporter went. And I was covering Harold Washington at the same time, you know, going back and forth. And it was a--well, after I became a columnist, I did--I remember one day I wrote a column. You know, now, I can give my opinion, right. I can say how I really feel about things. And I was working on this column in which I made some passing reference to, in recalling the mayoral race, about--I can't remember what exactly I said. But it was something like I made a reference to how Bernie Epton's campaign had--well, I didn't say "played the race card," but I essentially said that, that they turned, you know, took advantage of the racial divisions that had occurred. And Bernie Epton became the white candidate and all this kind of thing. Bernie sent me a poignant letter. I was really surprised. He was genuinely hurt that I would think that he had somehow exploited race in his campaign or that his campaign had benefited from the race card 'cause he said, "I thought you were different from those other people who were talking like that, that you knew me better than that; that I wouldn't do something like that." And I felt like--I never got a chance to talk to him about it. I wrote him a note back, now, Bernie, a good old-fashioned guy, this is before everybody was e-mailing anyway. And so I wrote him a note back, and said, you know, I'm really surprised and saddened that you feel that way, Bernie, because I thought you understood what was going on around you at the time. I don't think he actually did. I know other people who know Bernie Epton a lot better than me, going way back, didn't think so. His brother, Sol, felt he was being naive as to how he was being used by Republican leaders and Eddie Vrdolyak and other opportunists who saw in him a chance to get control of City Hall back after Jane Byrne was defeated and that Bernie was kind of, you know, riding along blissfully naive. And I remember on a number of occasions now, we'd ask him, "What's your next stop, Bernie?" And he'd say, oh, I don't know. I just go where my scheduler sends me. And he was serious. He wasn't joking, you know. It was like he was really riding along on this thing, and enjoying the wave and the possibility that he just might be mayor. And he, and so he waged an aggressive campaign. So I was surprised that he was so--it was like he didn't really understand the relationship between--I'm still a reporter (laughter), you know (unclear), as the, you know, what was it? Another politician said the first thing you need to learn when you're running for office is reporters are not your friends and even when you've got a reporter who was your friend before, you know, now your relationship is different. You know, you cannot treat reporters like your friends. Story_ID: 37710 Speaker 1: And Jesse Jackson made that mistake in thinking that a black reporter was going to be hip to his sarcastic use of "Hymie" to refer to-- Speaker 2: Right, now, that's '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: Yeah-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that's in '84 [1984], yeah, it's sequential. Yeah, we got the, 1984-- Speaker 1: Same time. Speaker 2: --the "Hymietown" comment that Jesse Jackson made. Speaker 1: A lot of folks say Jesse ran for president precisely because Harold Washington had become mayor of Chicago [Illinois], and that was, well, certainly, that encouraged Jackson. And then he went--well, some say Harold replaced Jesse as the Number One black person in Chicago, (laughter) black leader in Chicago, and so Jesse had to move to a different turf, like the country, and there's some truth to that too. But, and there's no question that Jackson was very successful in many ways at advancing his agenda nationwide and also getting people to take seriously the idea of a black man as president, which, in its own way helped to prepare the country for the eventual election of [President] Barack Obama. Speaker 2: Well, tell the story so future generations can know what happened. He, Jesse Jackson is running for president in '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: He makes this great speech at the Democratic National Convention-- Speaker 1: Um-hum. Speaker 2: --mesmerizes people. And a black--am I getting it straight in terms of the sequence? Speaker 1: Oh, no, the interview came earlier. Speaker 2: It came before the speech? Speaker 1: Before the New York primary in the spring, right about this time of year. It was in the spring before the New York primary, and that was-- Speaker 2: Well, pick it up. Speaker 1: --and that was why the question of New York voters know your chances of winning a New York primary. And it was Coleman Young--not Coleman Young, Milt Coleman, Milton Coleman of the 'Washington Post' was the reporter interviewing him, and just the two of them in a room. And he asked him, you know, a question about his chances of, how does New York primary look to you? And Jesse said, can we talk black for a minute, you know, and just wanted to be candid. He should have said, "Can we go off the record." (laughter) But instead he said, you know, he wanted to be cute, "Can we talk black for a minute?" You know, and he didn't get a secure off-the-record agreement, and so it was like, he then starts talking about, kind of sarcastically about "Hymie" and "Hymietown," winning "Hymietown" and all. What he was saying was that you've got to appeal to the Jewish vote and, but he was using, you know, just nickname jargon to say it. So he wasn't trying to be mean to Jews. He was just using some jargon there in this conversation. But when it hit print--and even the 'Washington Post' story ran it like it was, paragraph 17 or something like that. It was after it hit print that the stuff hit the fan. And suddenly Jackson was being questioned about this as an anti-Semitic, blah, blah, blah, and he apologized. But it was a big setback 'cause New York voters who had been skeptical of him anyway, that skepticism was confirmed in a lot of minds. And that really was a big setback for his campaign. Nobody expected Jackson to win. But it hurt his ability to win as much as he did, you know. He won a couple of caucus states as I recall. And he got a respectable vote turnout, much larger than Pat Buchanan ever got. I think it was something like 7 million votes he got totally. And he could have gotten more. And his whole thing was leverage. You know, the more votes you have--which is what Ron Paul's doing now. The whole thing was leverage, get delegates. And then they gotta take you seriously at the convention. And then you can have, you can be in the room when the decisions are being made as to who the running mate's gonna be and this kind of thing and get some commitments for the black community. So it was a big setback for him. It was the speech you're talking about, I guess there were two 'cause he addressed both conventions, in '84 [1984] and '88 [1988]. The '84 [1984] speech, I think was the one where he used the line, "The Lord's not finished with me yet," you know, very apologetic, but saying, you know, I'm getting better. I'm gonna improve. I remember that, you know, "The Lord's not finished with me yet" was a great line. And in '88 [1988] I remember, the second time he ran and got more votes, but at that convention, he brought his kids up on stage and including Jesse, Jr., now a Congressman from Illinois. And you know what makes me feel old, Jesse, Jr. has more tenure than any other congressman from Illinois. Right now, he's the senior congressman from Illinois (laughter). And I'm thinking you mean little Jesse who used to be up on that stage with (laughter), back there in '88 [1988]. Story_ID: 37711 Speaker 1: Now you interviewed Minister Farrakhan too, Louis Farrakhan-- Speaker 2: Yeah, in '84 [1984]. Speaker 1: In '84' [1984] 'cause he made a similar blunder, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, you're talking about the, this was, yeah, well, actually, right after--it was in the wake of the whole "Hymietown" thing, if you will, that Farrakhan--and this was before Jesse Jackson had secret service protection, Farrakhan provided Fruit of Islam protection. And at a news conference, I believe it was 'cause I remember the tape image very well, he was--oh, wait a minute. He was preaching, maybe it was Savior's Day, when he said something about the--he referred to Zionists and their gutter religion, although he says he said, "dirty" religion. It sounds like he was saying "gutter," and said, I would never say my Zionists brothers are in the gutter. (laughter) Dirty is just as bad. But anyway, there was something else though. There was also another offense of his--I'm trying to--it's going, it'll come to me. But he was, in regard to--oh, I remember. It was at a news conference, I believe, I think a reporter was asking him questions. But it was in regard to the security. He made some threatening remark in regard to Milton Coleman, it was like "Someday soon we will punish you with death or God will punish you with death," and I don't think he mentioned Milton Coleman by name, but it was obvious who he was talking about, traders to the race, whatever, trader to the cause. And I remember that line "Someday soon we will punish you with death." It reminded me of the remarks he made before Malcolm X was assassinated. And so that was, that was a big deal, but that Farrakhan into public light, which again, I was in the catbird seat for this because I'd been familiar with Muslims all my life. They--even growing up in Southern, Ohio, they came to the door regularly, every week or two to sell the, sell fish, bean pies and the 'Pittsburgh Courier', which carried Elijah Muhammad's column, which was called "Muhammad Speaks" and later he turned into a free-standing newspaper. But going way back then when I was a kid in the '50s [1950s], I remember the Muslims and then later, my, a cousin of mine in Detroit [Michigan] became a Muslim and still is. And she became a, Elijah Muhammad Muslim, and now she's part of the Orthodox with Wariff Dean Muhammad movements, movement that Elijah Muhammad's son started. But so I knew that Farrakhan didn't just spring into existence yesterday. He had a very interesting history of his own and became a Muslim. You know, before he became a Muslim, he was a Calypso Gene, Eugene Wolcott, a musician, violin player. He was a, performed on Ted Mack's Amateur Hour many years ago, just like or was it Major Bolls. I get them mixed up. Maybe it was, Major Bolls, I think it was the same show Gladys Knight made when she was eight years old. Speaker 1: I think it was Ted Mack (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Was she Ted Mack 'cause I--I think Elijah Muhammad or rather Farrakhan was a Major Bolls, which was a radio show actually. But anyway, 1955, he was performing at Mr. Kelly's in Chicago [Illinois], the old--remember Mr. Kelly's there. I interviewed Barry Manilow, his first interview there (laughter), but anyway, that's another story--and Dick Gregory too at Mr. Kelly's. But there was, Farrakhan, then Calypso Gene Wolcott was performing at Mr. Kelly's on a Sunday afternoon. He was walking down the street. He ran into an old friend of his who was wearing a bowtie and a suit and inviting him to come see Elijah Muhammad. And that was when he was exposed to Muslims and he became one. So, and, of course, we know the history of the Muslims themselves, Nation of Islam goes back to the early 1930s there in Detroit and all. Story_ID: 37712 Speaker 1: Anyway, I'm backgrounded on this, right? And so I asked my, a buddy of mine over at 'Chicago Magazine', you know, nobody's really giving anybody the Louis Farrakhan Story, but, you know, 'Chicago Magazine' would be a perfect place to do it. I'd be happy to write it for you. And he was, he liked the idea. He was a former '[Chicago] Tribune' newsman, but, you know, 'Chicago Magazine' was, you know like most urban magazines, many wanna sell ads and kind of fluffy and tourists and night clubby oriented, what's the best pastrami in town. But he popped the idea to the other editors, and they went for it. So that is how I did the Farrakhan piece which, again, raised my national brand 'cause nobody else till then had really done a comprehensive Louis Farrakhan article. And, and [Louis] Farrakhan sat down with me and that's a funny footnote since the subject of this interview is me, one footnote, a personal footnote. The day I finally got Farrakhan to sit down with me, once I got him and it was not easy. But once I did, he didn't wanna shut up. (laughter) Once you get him, you know, he's happy to just talk and talk and talk and talk and talk. And I ran out of tape. I had three hours worth of tape and ran out (laughter). And then I started getting worried because, you know, we'd gotten together in the morning, I had a lunch scheduled downtown with Jack Fuller who I had found out through an inside source, I will not divulge, and was inviting me to lunch to offer me the, a chance to come back to the 'Tribune' and be editorial board member. And I was gonna pitch the column idea to him. Wouldn't you know, it just happened to be the same day (laughter) as the Farrakhan interview. And I'd been thinking all along, well, I, you know, Farrakhan, well, I'll be lucky if he talks to me for an hour, and then I can just go on downtown. And, yeah, he just kept on talking. He would have talked to me all day if I would have had the time and the tape. But I actually had to beg off from Farrakhan after three hours. And I'm out of tape, and I've been scribing notes, after I ran out of tape and all that. But, no, he was a very, very engaging man. He did remind me of Malcolm [Malcolm X] in a lot of ways 'cause I was surprised--I've never met Malcolm X, but I saw him on TV. And I was surprised 'cause--I was in high school [Middletown High School, Middletown, Ohio] at the time, and I'd only heard that Malcolm X and Muslims didn't like black--didn't like white people. And I was surprised that he was on a white man's show, Les Crane's old late-night show. He had a lot of unorthodox guests. It was a great show. He had Bob Dylan, Odetta, a lot of people you didn't see any place else on TV. You saw them there, and the one night he says, "After this commercial break, we'll have Malcolm X." I said, what, (laughter) you know. I remember, boy, he--it shocked me how smart, how engaging he was, how funny he was, how he could be real serious and make an argument in just a few words, an amazing man. It was just breathtaking. I, what, a year or two later, he was dead, he was assassinated. I felt personally--I was just coming out of high school at the time, getting ready to go to college, I felt personally wounded by his death. I felt like he'd been getting a bum shake. And at that point, when he was on Les Crane's show, he had broken with Elijah Muhammad already, and he was trying to build this Pan African movement and all. And I really liked him and respected him so much. And then when his book came out, it was life changing with his book. Alex Haley's book was life changing for me, and I know for a lot of other young black folks. I know Clarence Thomas was, life changed by Malcolm X's autobiography (laughter). You know, it affected the consciousness of a generation. And I heard a lot of that in Farrakhan. There were some other things about Farrakhan that troubled me. I, it was like, I felt like he had not changed enough from the Farrakhan who took over from Malcolm X and that whereas, Malcolm was trying to move ahead, move beyond race, get back to Orthodox Islam, Farrakhan was committed in the other direction and still is. He was committed toward building a separate black nation. He was committed toward this offshoot version of Islam. He was committed toward a, a sense that racism is still immovably imbedded in the DNA of America, etc., etc. And he was charitable in his outlook, you know. In fact, they can't help themselves. They're just racists and that's just it, you know (laughter). And we must pity them, blah, blah, blah, and all that. But he is nevertheless, he is an endlessly fascinating figure, isn't he, I mean even today, you know. I mean you think about how many times over the last few years we thought is Farrakhan gonna live out the week. And he's popping back (laughter), you know. The latest Saviors Day stories came out, and I said, oh, he's up there on Savior's Day, just like the old days and looking remarkably fit, not only for a man of his age but for a man who's allegedly been on death's door several times and this sort of thing. And so, so, yeah, I, back then I always thought it would be great to do a book about Farrakhan 'cause he's worth a good book. And somebody's gonna do one, one of these days here, you know, 'cause Heaven knows, the autobiography of Malcolm X was not the book on Malcolm. That was just the beginning (laughter) 'cause much scholarship remains to be done. Story_ID: 37713 Speaker 1: Now in '86 [1986], you publish 'A Foot in Each World'. Now, this is-- Speaker 2: Well, Northwestern University Press published it. I edited-- Speaker 1: You did the editing. Speaker 2: Right, right, yeah, I did an introduction for it and selected the essays that Leanita [McClain; Page's first wife] wrote to be included in the book. And it was a, it was a nice tribute for her. I don't know what's happened to it since then. I think, I mean I--Northwestern University Press published it initially. And somebody else brought the rights, I don't know, maybe about a decade or so ago, I saw on Amazon that, you know, it had been republished under a different title. And I, I think there are still people who ask about her, but it's been, gosh, what, thirty years now. So it's like folks, well--younger people have heard about her through older folks. She's kind of legendary in that regard. And I think her work holds up, her--especially, the essay I referred to earlier, during Harold Washington's campaign, and another one that she did for 'Newsweek Magazine' in 1980 about the--what was the title on that one? It was something like the, "The Black Middle Class Burden," I believe was the title, headline on the essay. And that, at the time in 1980, talking about the ambivalence of being a member of this new emerging black, middle class, of having risen up from, you know, what I call a ghetto to gold coast story, from public housing on the South side of Chicago, Ida B. Wells Public Housing, to the 'Chicago Tribune'. And at that time, she was just becoming a page editor. They'd promoted her to a--wait, she hadn't been promoted to that yet. She was still on the copy desk. But she was part of that first generation of African Americans in the mainstream media. She was, she and I were living in that good old middle-class comfort in a North side condo, becoming what would be known as Buppies in the 1980s and belong to this new Buppie class, and yet she would have moments, like getting the bus to ride downtown in the morning and seeing a cleaning lady get off the bus who was a neighbor of hers from the projects, who was coming up to clean somebody's apartment or condos, but it was condo. And instances like that would happen. Her sister, her middle sister, out of three, who was a school teacher and lived in a condo there overlooking Diversey Harbor. Taxi drivers on one or two occasions had taken her to the back door instead of the front door, (laughter) bringing her home, presuming that she must work there, and this kind of thing, you know. That's what that, the essay was about. It was a real eye opener. It got so much reaction, 'Newsweek', the editor who had edited her at 'Newsweek' said they got more mail on that than anything, any other essay they'd run in a while, you know, what they call the "My Turn" essay. And she even got a request from a newspaper in South Africa that wanted to reprint it, and they did. So it was like she was, suddenly this essay is like internationally famous. But it was a real--you read it now, it was a real period piece. But I think that in some ways, it still applies to what's going on, except black folks aren't alone. We're seeing other, this is an emerging story now that the new divide in America is by income and education. If you've got some education beyond high school, you can get into the middle class. You can stay there. You can rise. If you don't have anything beyond a high school diploma or less, you suffer income stagnation. And that's been true since around 1980, since the late 1970s [1970s]. About that same time was the beginning of this divide we're living with today. And that's true whether you're black or white. It's--the recent census figures show that, you know, everybody talks about the out-of-wedlock birth rate among black folks. It's like skyrocketed up like 67 percent. Well, the out-of-wedlock birth rate among single, white women without a college, a high school diploma, without a high school diploma, single, white women, they're up to 64 percent. And among college-educated blacks and whites, both in the--well, for college-educated whites, it's below 10 percent. For college-educated blacks, it's like below 12 percent, as I recall off hand. I mean in other words, you know, race is becoming less of a divide than income and education. And this is something that black folks are just really starting to come to grips with, I think, and especially those of us who are in that college-educated class. We need to find some kind of leadership on this and, because it's getting harder and harder to get a college diploma. I told you the story about me going to college, you know, and I worked in the steel mill in the summertime. I went to college in the winter time. You can't do that now. The steel mill jobs I used to work aren't there anymore. They're gone overseas. The college tuition I paid at my univ--at Ohio University [Athens, Ohio], it's ten times higher now than it was, ten times higher than when I was going. So, a kid's got less of a chance to get, to find the money, and then the price tag gets harder and harder to meet. We've gotta do something about that. This has been going on for at least the last thirty years now, since the '60s [1960s]. The American dream is drying up around us. And, again, you know, black folks are merely the leading edge on this divide that's affecting the rest of the country. Story_ID: 37714 Speaker 1: Now, you talked about, early on, your job and Leanita's [McClain; Page's first wife] and other black journalists, basically came in on the heels of the riots, and then also that you came out of a working-class environment into these jobs. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So you got a foot in each world-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, she and I were both-- Speaker 1: You talked about where you were able to interview [Louis] Farrakhan. You knew Muslims, and you could talk to them-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --you (unclear). But what does it mean philosophically today to have a foot in each world or do we--are we running out of people that now have a foot in each world? Speaker 2: Well, it's a good question. You know, there's a lot of different worlds, first of all. Leanita and I both had a foot in each world, but the world I grew up in was different than the one she grew up in. I grew up in a relatively small, working-class--well, we had all the classes, but it was a factory town [Middletown, Ohio]. It was a steel mill town. My dad [Clarence H. Page] worked at the paper mill. There were like about five paper mills there. You know, it was an old, old-school factory town. All the paper mills are gone now. The steel mills are a small part of what it used to be. But I grew up going to school with white kids for one thing. We had, I grew up in an integrated environment, even though we had some segregation where I couldn't go to the local amusement park near our house because I was black and my family couldn't, but I could go up to Dayton [Ohio] to a lakeside park or Cincinnati [Ohio] to Coney Island. And Leanita grew up in Chicago [Illinois] and the South Side, didn't go to school with white kids until I think high school. I think she went to Lucy Flower on the West Side, and I'm trying to remember if there were any white kids at Lucy Flower when she was there. I think maybe they were--as I recall, she said, she didn't really go to school with white kids until she got to Chicago State [University] in college, and then she went to Northwestern [University], which was a real different world than what she grew up in, up there in Evanston [Illinois]. And she's with these hard-driving Northwestern kids, most of whom came from really fancy private schools or suburban schools like New Trier and others. And she was as smart as any of 'em or smarter. I mean she was a very, very intelligent woman, and that's why people were urging her at Chicago State, you know, don't just be a school teacher, which is what she was gonna be, a school teacher, you know. One of the teachers there urged her, said, you know, people are, in the media, the downtown papers, they're looking for black reporters. You could do it, you know. Apply at Northwestern, and they'll give you a scholarship. And this was a white teacher of hers who had told her this. And I, I mean I had white folks encouraging me back in my hometown too. I think this is an important thing, you know, that people talk about mentoring. It doesn't matter what color the mentor is. Just make a connection with young people because they need mentors, no matter what color they are or what color the mentors are. But this made a bit of a difference. I mean she, she used to chide me about being a small-town guy, small-town boy. And also a bit naive about race 'cause I'd grown up around white people and all or had grown up in an integrated environment anyway and all. But this was, and this fascinated me, just the very notion of growing up without having anybody but black folks around. I think that's sad. I think it's sad for anybody to grow up, as sad as it is for a white to grow up with only white kids around. I think it's sad not to be part of this diversity of this great nation of ours. And we are becoming more diverse all the time. So it's a, so in that sense, we were somewhat different, and how much difference does that make? I think that's part of the story too. Story_ID: 673209 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please? Speaker 2: My name is Clarence Eugene Page [HistoryMaker Clarence Page], C-L-A-R-E-N-C-E, last name, P-A-G-E, and happy to be here. Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your title and occupation? Speaker 2: I am a syndicated columnist for the Chicago Tribune. Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date? Speaker 2: Today--it bea- beats me. I think it's, what is it, the 30th, 31st (laughter)? Speaker 1: (Unclear). Speaker 2: What is it? Oh, okay. Today is May 22nd, 2014. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: We are in my home in Tacoma Park, Maryland. Speaker 1: Okay, now, we're finishing a interview that we started about two years ago. And we left off--at the last session--this is our third session, the last session, we stopped at about 1989, I believe. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Story_ID: 673210 Speaker 1: So, I wanted to ask you about--oh, I didn't ask you about--now, you got married in 1987. Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-seven [1987], yes. Speaker 1: Right, and you wanna tell us how you met your wife [Lisa Page]? Speaker 2: I met my wife at a party in Chicago [Illinois] that was sponsored by, at that time, Chicago magazine was sponsoring what is now the Heartland Prize [Chicago Tribune Heartland Prize]. Then it was the Nelson Algren Award for short stories. And I was at the--well, I was at the party because it's, it was one of the great events of Chicago during the year. And this young woman came over to me, and says, "Excuse me, are you [HistoryMaker] Clarence Page?" And I said, "Well, yes, I am." And she said, "I think you're wonderful." And I was immediately smitten by this young woman (laughter). She was saying, "I think you're wonderful because," she was complimenting an article ['Deciphering Farrakhan'] that I had written for Chicago magazine earlier that year on Louis Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan]. That was back in 1984 when this, when this all happened. And it was, I immediately wanted to ask, "It's a pleasure to meet you. What are you doing for the rest of your life?" You know, 'cause I (laughter)--well, I immediately invited her out to lunch, said, you know, "Is there any time you might be free for lunch between now and the rest of your life?" And I--we got together. But that was the beginning of a r- of, what's the line from 'Casablanca,' it was the beginning of a beautiful relationship. Story_ID: 673211 Speaker 1: Eighty-seven [1987] was also the year that your column ['Page's Page'] was syndicated nationally, right? Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Okay, and, so how did you handle that transition of writing locally and, and then having to write for a national audience? Speaker 2: It's a good question. You know, the, the transition from, going from a local columnist to a national columnist was a very interesting one. I was very excited by it, naturally, because of appealing to a national audience. But there's a lot of advantages to being a local columnist because--and I mean advantages for me and advantages for the reader because the local columnist is so attached to the local community that you both have a, an interest in issues and people that the major media may not otherwise be interested in. And also, you're more accountable. When you leave work every day, you walk out there and join the real, the same society that is reading your column; that turns to your newspaper as the primary news source in the community. When you're, when you're nationally a syndicated columnist, especially living here in Washington [D.C.], you don't necessarily run into people who have seen your column that day. You get emails and all and various other ways of communicating and all. But it's a little more distance. So I, I sometimes miss those days as a local columnist, especially when there's a great story happening in Chicago [Illinois] that doesn't have that much interest to the national audience. But you know as a good Chicagoan--(laughter) boy that's (laughter)--it really gets to the heart and soul of what it's all about. Story_ID: 673212 Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite Chicago [Illinois] columnist? There were so many good ones. Speaker 2: Oh, Mike Royko, of course. Everybody loved Mike Royko (laughter). Among us journalists, that was--he was the gold standard. And, you know what? (Unclear) I appreciate Mike Royko so much more now that he's gone because, you know, you don't appreciate people 'til they're gone. But the great thing about Mike was that he was, I'd say, part of that era of columnists who were what you'd call the saloon columnists, the ones--which is appropriate since his father [Michael Royko, Sr.] was a tavern owner (laughter). And you could--when you picked up Mike's column, it was like you just walked into your, your corner bar or whatever, and there are all the guys drinking shots and beers, whatever, doing their analysis of local, national, international affairs (laughter). And it was that kind of a voice that came out of that column. And that was, that represents a golden age of newspapers a century ago, during that great immigrant era when you had lots of new Americans coming in and wanting to learn how to be American. And so the newspaper performed that role, partly, I think it turned to that newspaper, and be part of that conversation and, and be part of the larger American conversation. By the time Royko died, in the '90s [1990s], things had changed. We were more diversity oriented in the media. And, you know, around the country the old columnists like Jimmy Breslin in New York [New York], Molly Ivins in Texas, Lewis Grizzard in, in Atlanta [Georgia], Herb Caen in San Francisco [California], those columnists who had the voice of their community began to fade, fade away. And we don't have that kind of columnist so much anymore. Now, the national conversation is more oriented toward issues than toward the local community. And so I, I've tried to bring a flavor of that to the national media; and it's been, been--it's been a good experience because people, I think, are looking for columnists who can help to take this explosion of information that's around us now and turn it into something that they can respond to, make some sense out of it in other words. Speaker 1: Right, right, yeah, thank you for mentioning Lewis Grizzard. I'd been trying to think of his name for a long time (laughter). Speaker 2: Yeah, he used to be sports editor at the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times], in fact, for--I'm sorry, at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] actually. And then he went to the Sun-Times; and then went, then to Atlanta. But, yeah, he was hilarious guy, I mean (laughter). That was really--he was a much better columnist than editor (laughter), 'cause he would--some people are like that. They were--I've always felt that was me (laughter), you know, that I was a better, a better, what, writer or reporter than a management person. We all have our roles in life. Speaker 1: Yeah, and those are columnists, the ones you mentioned, are the ones that a lot of black people would read too. Royko (unclear) I know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --would--white columnists that really had the ear of the black community. Speaker 2: That's right. And speaking of black columnists, you know, I miss Carl Rowan and Bill Raspberry [HistoryMaker William Raspberry], they were two examples of national columnists from Washington [D.C.], but who wrote about issues that really hit home with people and wrote about issues that people really cared about in their day to day lives like education, housing, nutrition, et cetera; and again, you know, the columnist has a role of taking all the various wire stories coming in every day and the big debates going on and turn that into information, the kind of news that people can use. Speaker 1: Yeah, and Royko has a special place, and, of course, Molly Ivans, that you mentioned was a--she and Royko, you know, (unclear) the comfortable a lot. Speaker 2: Yep, and they could find (laughter)--absolutely, they could find the humor in (laughter), in these absurd situations too. Speaker 1: And Royko had a character in his column that was (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Slats Grobnik, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, Slats Grobnik, right. Speaker 2: Right, I--and like Bill Raspberry had his cabbie, the taxi driver who--only guy in Washington I know of who somehow always got the same taxi driver whenever he caught a cab (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, right. So, so you've never used that kind of device in your columns, have you? Speaker 2: I tried it, you know, early on, but it's not really my style, and it's a, it's something that I wasn't really that comfortable with it. So I never developed it, which may also be why I've yet to write my great American novel (laughter). I'm, I'm so inundated or shall we say, I'm so involved with, with keeping track of, of facts, and I find so many facts that are more absurd than anything I could make up, that I've never been that good at making stuff up (laughter). Story_ID: 673213 Speaker 1: How would you describe your style as a columnist or did you, did you--who did you pattern yourself after or did you pattern yourself after anyone--most folks do, so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, yeah, you know, a combination of a lot of different people. I mean I've always admired Mark Twain, who pioneered the, what they call the common man's voice or whatever in literature, and for all the controversies about 'Huckleberry Finn' ['The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,' Mark Twain] and the use of the N word, I think it's the great American novel. And I have defended teaching the book in its original form, at least to high school students, if not younger. But in any case, go from Mark Twain to Damon Runyon to, to--well, or, don't miss Frederick Douglass (laughter). I'm just in awe of the man's command of literature, and you could see why they didn't want the slaves to know how to read and write (laughter) because he, and he showed the power of the word, and, and at the same time could communicate with the ordinary person with such power and effectiveness. And so I, you know, come on up to the present day, I, I feel like, you know, I cannot describe my style, per se, but when I sit down to write, I try to put myself in that situation of being around the poker table or at the salon or wherever else, around the pool room table or whatever, just talking with friends and neighbors about the issues and try to use that voice, to have that conversation on the page that really is what people turn to opinion pages for, I believe. And so it's been--you know, sometimes you--the humorous sarcastic voice is appropriate. Sometimes the very solemn voice is appropriate. Other times the call-to-action, but I feel like, if I have any purpose, it is to give my opinion and to do it in a way that helps to analyze and make sense of the news for my audience because I don't have enough room in, what, seven hundred words to be able to go that much in depth. That's what reporters do as far as the facts go. So it's more of analyzing the facts, and pulling all that together in a way that folks can form an opinion of their own, whether they agree with mine or not. Speaker 1: Yeah, it's like what organizers call cutting an issue. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. Speaker 1: Cut it down to a simple, "This is what this is about." Speaker 2: Exactly right. Speaker 1: (Unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: If you can get it down to a bumper sticker (laughter) you've really, you've really accomplished something as a columnist, and even more so as somebody who uses Twitter 'cause that's what it's really for (laughter). Story_ID: 673214 Speaker 1: In 1989, your son [Grady Page] was born. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Also, you won a Pulitzer Prize [Pulitzer Prize for Commentary]. Speaker 2: Yep, it's (laughter)-- Speaker 1: It was a good year (unclear)-- Speaker 2: It's funny. The spring of '89 [1989] was a time when, while waiting for my son to arrive--I should say, our son; my wife [Lisa Page] had something to do with it--I got the news that I had won the Pulitzer Prize. And I said, ain't this something. All these years, I've always dreamed of winning a Pulitzer, and never imagined that when it happened, it would be anticlimactic 'cause it just didn't match the excitement of waiting for my (laughter), for--waiting for my boy to arrive. And so, you know, it's really, was something that--well, both those experiences changed my life (laughter) and both about the same time. Speaker 1: So prior to you--now, you were the, you were the third or fourth African American to win a Pulitzer Prize? Speaker 2: I was the first African American to win a Pulitzer Prize for com- column writing. Speaker 1: Okay, you were the first--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: All right. Speaker 2: --and, Gwendolyn Brooks was the first to get it for poetry, and (laughter) there--I think that was the only other--it's hard to say. But I think it--well, as far as media go, that was the only other individual, black winner. And that's not to say--I have to point out that I was the first black journalist to deserve a Pulitzer Prize 'cause there were numerous others--I mean Carl Rowan and Bill Raspberry both started in the business before I did, of writing columns. And Raspberry did get a Pulitzer later in the '80s [sic. 1994], and others have. But, you know, we gotta remember that black folks weren't getting Pulitzers until (laughter) the, until--well, I mean it's absurd to think of how, how late it took 'cause black folks were, were winning team Pulitzer's that were, that were working with other people. Alex Haley got a Pulitzer for 'Root'--for writing 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family']. But it was a special Pulitzer [Special Awards and Citations] that they decided to award because the book didn't fit into the normal categories of fiction, nonfiction. But in any case, it was--I always remember that Duke Ellington deserved to get a Pulitzer for his artistic creativity, and they, they voted on it. He was nominated and then the board turned him down so even a talent as great as his and so many others. And so I came along at a good time in business for being, being recognized. But it still boggles my mind that I actually won the award (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay. Since then there's been, I guess, about six others. As you say, [HistoryMaker] William Raspberry--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's about right. Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] E.R. Shipp, [HistoryMaker] Leonard Pitts, Cynthia Tucker, Eugene Robinson. I think [HistoryMaker] Angelo Henderson and recently, a Detroit [Michigan] writer. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: I think Stephen, is his name Stephen Henderson? Speaker 2: I, no, yeah, I haven't, I haven't met him. I'm not sure, yeah, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Yeah, he won one. Speaker 2: Yeah, I know all the rest of 'em though, yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Was Colbie King [HistoryMaker Colbert I. King] on the list that you mentioned? Speaker 1: I'm sorry? Speaker 2: Colbie King from--Colbert King from Washington Post [The Washington Post]--(simultaneous)? Speaker 1: No, I didn't know he--(unclear)--yeah, yeah, Colbert King, right--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Colbert King-- Speaker 1: Colbert King, right. Speaker 2: Yeah, he, he got a Pulitzer a few years back also. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And he--he's primarily a local columnist and that was really great to see. Story_ID: 673215 Speaker 1: Did winning a Pulitzer help you professionally? Speaker 2: Oh, you know, the funny thing about winning a Pulitzer is all of a sudden everybody treats you like an expert (laughter). And somebody said--it's often said that when you win a Pulitzer, at least you know what the first three words on your obituary are going to be 'cause it's just that kind of an accolade. At the same time, it can be very daunting to win a Pulitzer because I, my immediate feeling was, oh, my g- and when I started to write my next column, my feeling was, oh, my gosh, everybody's gonna be reading this now, saying, "Well, let's see what that Pulitzer Prize [Pulitzer Prize for Commentary] winner has to say," expecting a Pulitzer Prize winning quality. I'd learned that other Pulitzer winners have had that same kind of, kind of artist block. In fact, well, cartoonists I know who, who won Pulitzers said they had a terrible time going back to drawing their next cartoon because they, they felt like, ah, the audience out there is expecting Pulitzer quality every time. And everybody's got their good days and bad days, off days, whatever. So it took a while to get over that. But it was worth it. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, was '89 [1989] in your opinion your best year as a columnist in terms of what you were actually writing--did you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Actually, actually the columns were '88 [1988], you know, the award was given in '89 [1989], but I won't call it my best year. But it was certainly a pivotal year in a lot of ways 'cause the column--as represented by the columns 'cause they--one of them was for, where I was taking dentists to task for turning down AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] patients, their dental practices 'cause they were afraid of getting AIDS. You know, it was a time, time of great irrational AIDS fears. There was a column which I was urging the mayor of Chicago [Illinois] at that time to drop the--(unclear) think for a second. Oh, goodness, I (laughter), I'm blocking--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Sawyer was the mayor (unclear)--[HistoryMaker] Eugene Sawyer--(simultaneous). Speaker 2: Thank you, Eugene Sawyer. Yeah, there was a big controversy then over the--excuse me for my--well, for my bad memory this morning. But there was the controversy over the mayoral aide [Steve Cokely] who was a colleague of Louis Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan]. You remember that (unclear) at the time--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Oh, I know him. Speaker 2: Yeah, and he pass--he has since passed away at a young age-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --which was sad. But in any case, well, let me start over here anyhow. Nineteen eighty-eight [1988] was a pivotal year in my view 'cause it really--when I go back and look at those columns, I can see issues that were indicative of those times. There was, you know, one involving Louis Farrakhan; one involving dentists turning away AIDS patients. You had issues like that that year that the whole country was looking at, and I think looking to opinion writers, really, in a different kind of way because a lot of new things were happening that people were looking for other opinions to help them form opinions of their own. And so, I think that, to that degree, the columns that I wrote impressed somebody as giving some additional insight into these various issues and moving the debate forward. And so it's a--so I think that was something that came together in ways I didn't expect. I was, I was talked into entering the contest by my editor-in-chief, Jim Squires [James D. Squires] at the time who said, "Yeah, you had a real good year. You need to put your Pulitzer package together," (laughter) you know, and he, he helped me do it 'cause you submit ten columns. And I wasn't expecting to win. And when I did, I was just astonished. But you never know. Story_ID: 673216 Speaker 1: You think there's any one thing that kicked you over the hill for the Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize for Commentary] that year or, do you think? Or was there one particular column that got a lot of attention that you? Speaker 2: I don't, I don't there was one particular column. I think, if anything, there was the atmosphere at the time. Remember, this was the end of the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] era, and it was a time when there was, when Harold Washington had been elected mayor of Chicago [Illinois], and we had--and then he died, and there was this tremendous political upheaval that had the eyes of the world looking at Chicago. I think a number of things like that may have impressed the judges to cause them to take a longer look at Chicago news than normally, but I became a Pulitzer judge after winning, which is pretty standard. And so I helped to judge Pulitzers for a couple of years in a row in (unclear) special, both news and in the, as well cartooning and find that, you know, the Pulitzer--the judges get inundated with piles (laughter) of entries from all over the country. And you go through them, and first thing you do is look at who ain't gon' win, who ain't got a chance (laughter). And you put them on the floor (laughter), you know, and you, you start to reduce that pile on the table. And it keeps going that way until you get down to where, you know, there are certain people who you say, oh, this deserves to win. And then you, you get about--down to about a couple dozen of those. And then after that, there's a whole lot of discussion and discussion among the judges as to where you go from there. So every kind of reason to give somebody an award is discussed, so it's very hard to single out anything particularly. In fact, there've been articles written about how every theory as to what wins a Pulitzer and doesn't always falls to dust, right after the theory comes out (laughter). Like there're--some will say, well, the big papers have an advantage. And then the next year, the small papers are taking everything away, you know, that kind of thing, you never know--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: I just thought of the Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer], that was about Steve Cobb [sic.]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Steve Cokely, Steve Cokely, that was--I knew it would come to me. It's all still up here. It just takes longer to get to the file cabinet. Speaker 1: Yeah, Steve Cokely-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --made a speech for Minister Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan], I guess, and he was--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --a staffer, he had just been hired as a staffer by Eugene Sawyer-- Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: --which people in the community really thought it was a, you know--and I was a member of the troublemaking community at that time. And we thought it was odd that Steve Cokely would be working for Mayor Sawyer, and (unclear)--but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I, I think it showed Sawyer's naivete and desperation. You remember that he was trying hard, he'd been virtually appointed by what was left of the old machine, you know. And here he was trying to now win the black community's support after having gotten into office without it. And I think somehow he wound up, you know, steering toward the m- the blackish of the black in the community (laughter) you know, to Louis Farrakhan and that led him to Steve Cokely; I think that was what happened 'cause he was very--once Cokely started, you know, ignited a controversy, that Sawyer was very reluctant to fire him. And that was what one of--what my column was about that was part of the Pulitzer package. Speaker 1: Yeah, I know a lot people I knew couldn't understand why Steve Cokely would not just resign after that. I mean, yeah, and he let it drag on. Speaker 2: I knew, I knew Steve. He wasn't, he wasn't about to resign or anything. He was a zealot (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, but he was just hurting Sawyer's chances. That's all. Speaker 2: That's what my column was about. That was it. That was it. I said, you know, but I, I urged Sawyer to bite the bullet and--'cause he's bringing down your mayoralty. And he's not worth it. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's--(unclear) you would, you would thought he would have been grateful on some level, at any rate. Story_ID: 673217 Speaker 1: Now, I don't know what happened in--well, Chicago [Illinois] is going through a transition, but you're like focusing on national issues now, and at some point, the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] decides to move you to Washington, D.C. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that discussion came up because around the time I won the Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize for Commentary]--actually, before I got the Pulitzer, I was invited to do essays for the 'NewsHour' ['PBS NewsHour'] who was in--the 'MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour' ['PBS NewsHour'] on public television out of Chicago. And they also invited me onto the program as a representative of a regional voice. They used to do live discussions with editorial writers from different parts of the country. And then 'The McLaughlin Group' also invited me on. And I became a regular on both programs around 1988 actually; and then when the Pulitzer came along in 1989, it raised my national profile even more, and I got, started getting invited onto 'Nightline' and other programs out of Chicago. And my--it was my editor at the time, Jack Fuller, then, who had, I believe, (unclear) Jack Fuller was editorial page editor. He had been talking with the editor-in-chief and the managing editor, and they were all talking about how the Washington bureau chief was saying that I was better known in Washington than the people in their Washington bureau (laughter). And so there's--some discussion came up about maybe Clarence [HistoryMaker Clarence Page] would like to move to Washington. And so they talked to me about it. And I said, oh, oh, that's great. I'd love to move to Washington. I've been, you know, I've always felt like Washington, New York [New York], L.A. [Los Angeles, California]--those are, are the Broadway stage of journalism, especially Washington, if you're a political junkie. The problem for me was convincing my wife [Lisa Page] (laughter) and so--who had just gotten a wonderful job teaching creative writing over at the Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]. And so it only took a mere year to talk her into (laughter) moving to Washington. And after we'd been down here for a year or two, she got into the place. She got her M.F.A. at George Mason University [Fairfax, Virginia]. She has been a teacher in the Washington public schools [District of Columbia Public Schools] and later at the George Washington University [Washington, D.C.] where she is now acting director of creative writing. So she's very much a Washingtonian in some ways more than me 'cause she's more involved in local Washington--which, national Washington, us national media people, know very little about, even though we live here. Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, okay. Yeah, that's--I mean it takes a lot of concentration to, I guess to write about all the political activities. It kind of isolates you from the rest of the city you think (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Washington, Washington's a schizophrenic city or certainly, a bipolar city in my assessment. I think Charles Dickens would have a field day here; it is 'A Tale of Two Cities': you've got official Washington and you've got the District [District of Columbia], and never the two shall meet. When I first moved here, one of my former Chicago buddies, who was over at NPR [National Public Radio] said, "You're gonna be amazed after a couple of years as to how little you will know about the District Building [John A. Wilson Building], which is D.C.'s city hall." And I thought, well, that's a little extreme now 'cause I, I know (laughter) who all fifty aldermen are in Chicago's city council [Chicago City Council]. I mean, you know, that's so much a part of Chicago life. But he was right. I still have a hard time--I don't know no more than a couple of members of the Chicago--of the D.C. council [Council of the District of Columbia]. I don't know them personally--but, well, one of them, [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry. Perhaps you've heard of him (laughter). He's, you know, former mayor, Marion Barry, member of the council. Everybody knows who he is. He's internationally famous or infamous, however you wanna look at it. But it's a funny thing though that, if you wanna know the difference, you just turn on the evening news and the local news, that's the District. And the network news, that's official Washington. And even though we live on the same real estate and ride the same Metro trains [Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority] to and from work, other than that, the worlds don't mix much. Speaker 1: That's right. So you moved in 1991 to D.C. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And, as a--so what was your official position at the Tribune bureau here? What was--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, I'm still a syndicated columnist-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --yeah, but I work--and still I, I work in the bureau and I mean my office is in the bureau, but I operate independently of the bureau because I report to the editorial page editor back in Chicago. So it's a--well, it's an interesting life because I do have the kind of independence that enables me to make my own assignments and to decide what, what I wanna write about. And they're still letting me get away with it after all these years. So I'm delighted. Story_ID: 673218 Speaker 1: Now in 1992--well, I'm sorry, in '92 [1992] you were inducted into the Chicago Journalism Hall of Fame [Chicago, Illinois]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: This is just as you're, just after you left Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 2: That's right. Speaker 1: But you're still a Chicago journalist, technically, right? Speaker 2: Well, you know, certainly I worked for the Chicago Tribune, and I'm best known in Chicago. And I know Chicago best. I love Chicago. And so I make no bones about it. It's--and, and Washington [D.C.] people understand that too. They still view me as a Chicagoan, and I still get people asking me, you know, "How often do you get back to Chicago," and all. And I, I say, "Well, you know, I live here now." They say, "Oh, you do?" (Laughter) It's only been over twenty years, for heaven's sake, but, yeah, people still identify me with Chicago. And whenever somebody wants to know something about Chicago, they always come to me. Speaker 1: Okay, so at this point, when you're inducted into the Chicago Journalism Hall of Fame, you'd been in journalism over twenty years, right? Speaker 2: I've been in journalism since I was seventeen, which is 1965, really when I first sold a story to the Cincinnati Enquirer as a freelancer (laughter). So I, you can do the math from there. Speaker 1: Okay, but it seems like a long time ago, and you're in the Journalism Hall of Fame in 1992. I mean it seems like a long time ago from (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the same thing with the three or four lifetime achievement awards I've gotten too. (Laughter) I mean it's like (laughter), you know, it's, like, like gee, is my life over now? And I've--I hope I got some more achievements left. Story_ID: 673219 Speaker 1: All right, now you wrote an article in--I'm backtracking a little bit, to nine- in '91 [1991] entitled 'The Nation: For Some Blacks, Social Ills Seem to Follow White Plans' [sic.], and it had to do with AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and, and the conspiracy theories in the black community around AIDS. Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. That's right, the paranoid style of American politics shows itself among black folks too (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, right, and I think it's increased since the Internet's been in, in practice here. Speaker 2: Isn't that ironic, you know, because the Internet also offers you the ability to knock down rumors. And look, look at the birther conspiracy theories, you know. As absurd as it is, and as easy as it is to go online and see the clear evidence that, yes, Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was born in Hawaii (laughter) as a U.S. citizen and all, nevertheless, you've still got people who just cling to it, to the belief, which shows you the human tendency to only listen to those facts they want to believe, not those that actually support the evidence or are supported by evidence. Speaker 1: Okay, so '92 [1992] is a presidential election year, and, now, you wrote a story about David Duke ['In Hard Times, It`s All Too Easy To Slight The Poor,' Clarence Page]. And I had forgotten he had made any history in those days, but what was David Duke doing? Speaker 2: Well, I, I wrote about David Duke several times in those days. I, I presume that was when he was running for governor maybe, I believe, of Louisiana 'cause he, 'cause he did--what I find striking or what I remember the most about that was that David Duke won a clear majority of the white vote in Louisiana, like 60 percent of it. If it wasn't for black folks and white (laughter)--I started to say sane white people (laughter). But in any case, Duke would have been governor of Louisiana. And that's why--it says something about the lingering quarrel we have with race in this country, that--episodes like that were happening in the '90s [1990s] and could easily happen again now. I've, I've written a lot over the years about what I call racial eruptions that, that come about. No matter how much progress we make as a society, every so often, some new episode comes along that has us rising up into a national argument or torment over race, whether it's, you know, the Clarence Thomas, Anita Hill hearings or the O.J. Simpson verdict [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995] back in the '90s [1990s] or the more recent--what was the name, Sterling, Donald Sterling, the Los Angeles Clippers owner; or the New Hampshire sheriff [Robert Copeland] who, who was--described Barack Obama with the N word and wouldn't apologize and was forced to resign. You know, the fact that these things happen in the age of Obama shows how, yeah, there's still racism out there. But I think more important than those individual episodes is institutional racism. We still have yet to deal with that, and if you look at the headlines that have been made about violence in low-income, black neighborhoods in Chicago [Illinois], for example. It goes back to the, to the legacy of institutional racism in this country. And that's what we have a much harder time grappling with in America. Story_ID: 673220 Speaker 1: Another subject you handled in the '90s [1990s] was the dichotomy between the black middle class and the so called black underclass, I mean the--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --the gap is getting bigger and bigger. Speaker 2: Bigger and bigger, yeah. Since the late 1980s, it's been clear that the gap between black have's and have-not's is now wider than the gap between blacks and whites, which was what obsessed us back in the '60s [1960s] with that racial gap. And a lot of us are still living in the '60s [1960s] (laughter) worrying about the gap between black and white and not recognizing how much the black community has changed from being, what, back in the '60s [1960s] when I first, back when I was in college [at Ohio University, Athens, Ohio] and started becoming a journalist, we, what? About, around 60 percent, well over half of African Americans were below the poverty line. By the early 1990s, only a fourth, of around 24 percent were below the poverty line. That's creeped up a little bit since then, but nevertheless, you've still got a big difference that occurred after the civil rights revolution illegalized legal segregation. We still have a big gap as a result of the legacy of what, hundreds of years of slavery followed by a hundred years of legal segregation, the legacy of that has left African Americans with a big wealth gap with white Americans that we are still--we've still got a long way to catch up on that. And this is the kind of thing that can be more difficult to describe than what you could put on a bumper sticker, but it's what I think us columnists ought to be about, is helping people to deal with that national conversation. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, how do you approach that? I mean often opinions about statistics and--come from columnists, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --so as a columnist who uses them effectively, I mean how do you--what's your approach to it? Do you wait for a government announcement about a certain stat being released from the Bureau of Justice [Bureau of Justice Statistics] or the housing department [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] or whatever-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --or do you, you know, pursue, you try to find--you know, you wonder if something's a certain way and then try to research it out? Speaker 2: Yeah, I deal with numbers by trying to avoid them (laughter) because they are the reason why I decided not to be an engineer and become a journalist instead. I, very quickly, find that the MEGO syndrome can set in--mine eyes glaze over (laughter) when I am looking at lots of statistics. No, I start from the issue. I start from the people and look at--I look at the state of our cities, Chicago [Illinois] and other cities, and I see how black in our cities has become identified with poor. And how true is that? So then I go to the statistics, and I find out that nationally, that nationally, a higher percentage of African Americans are below the poverty line. But the numbers--but a less larger number of white Americans are below the poverty line. Now, whenever I, I mention this on a radio talk show, I always get a call from some white folks saying, "What did you say? Well, what's your source for that?" (Laughter) Well, the U.S. Census Bureau (laughter). You know. Americans have it in their heads now, since the middle 1960s, at least, that most poor people are black. So when they hear about a poverty issue, they think, well, that's just for black folks, or that's just black folks trying to get special favors or whatever, you know, which tainted, distorted our debate about the affordable healthcare act [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010], for example, because a lot of white people thought, well, that's just a black president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] trying to get something for black people. And most of the beneficiaries of the Affordable Healthcare Act are white. And then you've got blacks and Hispanics, a higher percentage of blacks and Hispanic communities benefit from a healthcare program like this, but a higher number of white people benefit. But if you want to--now, when white votes for something or white opposition to something, colorizing it can be a very effective technique. It's called playing the race card (laughter) and every political group does it at one time or another. But in this case, the race card has helped to block the further advance of healthcare to all Americans. And you find this happening in the black community as well sometimes, that people can get some political leverage out of playing to racial issues. But one of--the great things about numbers, the statistics, is that they are the kind of facts that can bolster an argument and bring it back to the realm of reality and not just impressions. And so, I try to use them to reinforce an opinion rather than to focus all the attention on just the numbers themselves. Story_ID: 673221 Speaker 1: Also, in the '90s [1990s] you sort of resurrected the project that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was working on before he passed, the, the issue of poverty in the United States. Speaker 2: Oh, the War on Poverty, yeah. The- Dr. King was definitely turning toward the issues of poverty. Look at--what was he doing when he died. He was trying to help Memphis [Tennessee] garbage workers. Before that, he was in Chicago [Illinois] living on the West Side, trying to draw attention to slumlord housing and that was also the place where he had his biggest setback. The first Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] finally gave in, signed a covenant with Dr. King and promised to do this and that, just to get King outta town. Then when King left, went back to Alabama, Daley just ignored all that. And then when King died, and the worst riots in the country broke out after--in Chicago, (unclear) on the West Side. And it's like, no, this is the kind of thing, you can't bury these problems forever, but that's what we try to do in this country all the time, especially when the--I mean King found out himself that it was one thing to crusade for racial justice. But then when you crusade for economic justice as the old southern story, punch line goes, now you don' stopped preaching and gone to meddling because he really got the opposition (laughter). And it's, and it's still true today. President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] could certainly tell you (laughter). Story_ID: 673222 Speaker 1: To the '90s [1990s], these are the Clinton years, from '92 [1992] to 2000; do you have an assessment on the Clinton years in terms of--(unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Fascinating time. Yeah, I think about the Clinton years, I think about James Carville, the Democratic consultant who said, who says what part of the '90s [1990s] didn't you like; the peace or the prosperity? (Laughter) You know, it's really, you look back on the '90s [1990s], they look like golden years 'cause all of a sudden--well, there in the mid-'90s [1990s] we suddenly saw the great declines in poverty, crime rates, teen pregnancy rates, the economy recovered. And we saw a boom that helped to stimulate that good news. At the same time, we had, you know, one scandal after another as the, a conservative block of the Republicans went after the Clintons with everything they could come up with. And we suddenly had a culture war, religious war, moral war or whatever; and in the end, when the dust cleared, Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] and Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] came out looking--with higher approval ratings than they came into office with. It's really an amazing period, but it set the stage for the Obama era that came later. Speaker 1: Yeah, now, the '90s [1990s] was also an era in which the Republican right wing galvanized itself in the form Newt Gingrich and what a lot of people--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --refer to in those days as the Republican revolution. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: We saw Texas flip from a Democratic state to a Republican state, and a lot of other states, you know, followed suit. Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: Dick Armey and Tom DeLay and all them, they shut down the government for a day in '94 [1994], I believe. Speaker 2: There were actually two back to back shutdowns. That's right, and again, in the end the--Bill Clinton's approval ratings were higher, and the Republican approval ratings went down. But it set the stage for the era that we're in now and say--maybe that'll be my next book. You know, I've been gathering string on that because it's mainly an angle on how the Republican, what, as I put it, how the party of Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] lost people of color (laughter). It's one of the great ironies of my life 'cause when I was a kid, as you know, the--it wasn't unusual to have black Republicans. Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] would, got--in 1960, against John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], Richard Nixon got in the high thirties, around 37, 38 percent of the black vote at that time. And it was in '64 [1964] with Barry Goldwater that black folks turned away from the Republican Party 'cause Barry Goldwater (laughter) turned away from black folks by voting against the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] for heaven's sake. And then you had, I mean that--and it was right after John Kennedy's assassination, so you had every state but (unclear)--I think Goldwater won five states, I believe, including his own. Maybe it was six states, in the Deep South, plus Arizona, his own home state. And that was it. And it was just a landslide defeat. But it was the beginning of the conservative movement gathering itself to eventually take over the party and get Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] nominated in 1980. And then that led to the so called Gingrich revolution in the 1990s, and the fierce opposition that Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] has run into from the Tea Party. All of this is of a piece, it's been--it's very interesting at my age now to look back and thus see the way politics have changed in America during my, my lifetime and what it means for our future. But throughout it all, as much as people want to ignore it, the subtext of race is still there, like it's always been in this country's history. Story_ID: 673223 Speaker 1: Now, you're often cast on television as the sole black, you know, voice--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Is that what I am? I guess (unclear) (laughter)-- Speaker 1: And a lot of shows, 'The McLaughlin Report' ['The McLaughlin Group']-- Speaker 2: I think more like sole black face. I mean, you know, when people look at a talk show, they can see the, the diversity or lack of it right away (laughter). Speaker 1: Yeah, well, 'The McLaughlin' (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: But nobody ever calls up and says, "We need a black person for this show," you know (laughter). That's okay. Speaker 1: But you got Eleanor Clift, Pat Buchanan, you, John McLaughlin and usually one other conservative person usually-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --present, and, you know, McLaughlin himself comes across as very, kind of conservative fellow. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: You know, he's not radical by any chance, by any measure, but you've been on--I think you were on the early, on, in the early days of 'O'Reilly' ['The O'Reilly Factor']-- Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Speaker 1: --too; and but, so how many--do you have a limit on how many shows you're on, I mean, 'cause you're on a lot--you've been on a lot (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Oh, I don't have a limit, no, I, I--I respond to invitations, you know. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: First of all, this is Washington, D.C. where you have more TV cameras than people to stand in front of 'em. And so you got all these all news stations and other public affairs broadcasts that are going on. And they need people to come up and come in and sit in front of the camera. And so that's how I have gotten invited to, to be on various programs, and while I've been a, I've been a regular at various times on, on 'NewsHour' [PBS NewsHour] or 'McLaughlin Group'; and some MSNBC programs--Chris Matthews' show, 'Hardball' ['Hardball with Chris Matthews'] and others; also CNN programs. I, basically, I basically respond to invitations. In D.C. it's to be a talking head, just get your name in the rolodexes of the assignment desks, whatever people have now in the post-rolodex era. But that's what it really amounts to. And I appreciate it. It's interesting though about FOX [FOX News]. The last time I was on Fox was just before Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected, Bill O'Reilly had me on the program to respond to his own interview with Obama, that he had there in October of 2008. And it's interesting, they haven't invited me on since, but I've noticed that FOX has, has gotten even more stridently conservative since that period. And I don't know if they purposefully decided that I was too moderate of a voice (laughter) to invite on. I mean they do have some people, [HistoryMaker] Juan Williams and others who are, who are reputedly liberal and do offer alternative voices, but not very many of them. And, and at the same time, MSNBC now has become more stridently liberal, to counter program to FOX. And so we're seeing in cable TV at least, America's--American journalism has become more like the Brits' [British] and other countries that have a more explicitly partisan media. And I think it's a part of the same polarization of politics that we've seen in America in the last decade or two, and it's--I don't see it turning around. Story_ID: 673224 Speaker 1: Now in the black community, I know we often--there's often a black conservative presence on a show or something, and especially on black shows that get funding from outside sources, you find like, for instance on the--what's the black public affairs show that's shown in the mornings, Sunday--early Sunday mornings with [HistoryMaker] Armstrong Williams and they used to ha- well, I mean-- Speaker 2: I'm not familiar with it. I don't know. Speaker 1: Okay. Well, just (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Is it on one of the regular channels or-- Speaker 1: I think it's syndicated, and it comes up early in the morning. Speaker 2: That might be Armstrong's show. He's, he's always got something going with radio or TV. Probably, it's probably his own syndicated show. Speaker 1: Now, there was actually a show with--it was 'Black Issues in the News' [ph.] or something like that, and it was--but any rate, that--a lot of these shows tend to show, you know, well, the, I guess the premise is that you're striking a balance when you have a black conservative and a black liberal on a show-- Speaker 2: Mm, Um-hm. Speaker 1: --in the black community. But in the black community, you don't have that balance of--(laughter). I mean you may have one conservative out of a hundred or something, you know, ra- not like two opposing views in the, you know, in, in most situations. Most situations, they're not even there. You know, so-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, if your question is why aren't they there, I think it comes down to the fact that our politics have gotten very polarized along racial as well as political lines so that you have very few explicitly conservative black folks out there, unless they are professional conservatives, as I call them. And they are, but I, and I, and I mean, you know, I don't wanna overgeneralize 'cause I know some black conservative--professional black conservatives who are very responsible and thoughtful people, Bob Woodson [HistoryMaker Robert Woodson], the Center for Neighborhood Enterprise [National Center for Neighborhood Enterprise; Woodson Center, Washington, D.C.], a black think tank in Washington [D.C.], former NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] leader who decided, no market-driven solutions were better, like school vouchers and, what, various kinds of--enterprise zones and all. And I respect that. I think there's a lot of worthwhile ideas on the right. There was J.C. Watts, former congressman from Oklahoma, another leading black conservative, very responsible, real thoughtful guy, and complains about his own party, the Republicans, and how, as J.C. puts it, when, when black folks have a problem, Democrats show up. Republicans talk, but Democrats show up. And he says this to Republican audiences. And he's right. But that's the difference that black folks look to, who is coming out there to help me? Who does, who cares about my community? And the way you show you care is to be there. And he has, has urged more Republicans to come out to black communities, but, but, you know, so far, what you really see making the real big headlines are the professional black conservatives who can go on FOX News and various other places and spread the doctrine. But without actually having that much to do with actual programs out in black neighborhoods, and I find this to be fascinating. I, and I guess, I feel like--I mean I think it's second nature now 'cause I'm so involved in this all the time, but it's amazing how many Americans don't really understand that. They're just kind of puzzled, you know, who is that person on the air (laughter) or why don't, why do black people hate the Republican Party, this kind of thing. And I suppose I have a role to play as a, as a commentator to try to make some sense out of all that. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, yeah, that was a good--I, I--sorry for my clumsy question, but that's a good-- Speaker 2: It wasn't really a question. It was an observation. I turned it into a question (laughter). Speaker 1: Right, right, right, right--it wasn't even a question. But, right, and but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's something, I--I'll give a--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Your response is exactly what--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I've given a lot of thought to it too 'cause I'm involved in it all the time. Story_ID: 673225 Speaker 1: I should say that, by the way, that I've never viewed myself as being a liberal columnist or a conservative columnist 'cause I come from, from the Midwest, from, from southern Ohio where I was grown up to believe that, that moderation in all things. That was the ethos by which I was raised, and that includes it with politics. And I look to the, to the right and the left for people who are going to help America and those who are gonna hurt America. And, but after I became a national columnist, not locally. It's interesting. You know, as a local columnist, nobody asked me if I was conservative or liberal or even responded in that way. But when I became a national columnist, the first thing the syndicate asked me was, "What are you?" I said, "What do you, what do you mean?" He said, "Well, are you, you know, liberal or conservative?" You know, I really hadn't thought about it. And they, they finally decided to market me as being what, a guy who was left of center, but who will surprise you sometimes. Which I think is a good, good way to market me because these days, number one, if you're not explicitly conservative, then you're a liberal. (Laughter) That's, that's all there is to it. There's no middle ground now as far as the marketing world is concerned or the media world. And if you do try to be a little bit of both, it only confuses people now. It's the funniest doggone thing. So, so I don't run away from the liberal label because I believe in certain things. I believe in reality. I mean, you know, people talk about government run healthcare. You got the most popular, the most popular program in the U.S. government is Medicare. You cannot tell me that government healthcare is such a big problem when I can see how much Americans like it. But when I talk, asked Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], when he was running for president, back in the primaries, you know, "Why don't you just advocate expanding Medicare to cover everybody," he indicated, "Well, you know, it's not a bad idea, but you'd never get it through [U.S.] Congress. I wanna go with what I can get through Congress," which said a lot about Barack Obama, that he was willing to give up so much (laughter) of the debate, even before starting the debate. But he did get his healthcare program [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] through, raggedy as it was. He got it--he did get it passed. But to me, now, does my believing in Medicare make me a liberal? I know a heck of a lot of conservatives--I mean even at Tea Party rallies, they were saying, "Keep the government's hands off my Medicare," which told me they didn't know much about how the government works. But nevertheless, these silly labels, you know, right and left, that, well, they're great for marketing purposes, but it doesn't really solve the debate. Story_ID: 673226 Speaker 1: Now in 1996, I think it is, is when your book, 'Showing My Color' ['Showing My Color: Impolite Essays on Race and Identity,' Clarence Page] was, was published. Speaker 2: Yep, that's right. Speaker 1: And we, in the black community know what showing your color is about--I mean where the name comes from, but--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Great double entendre there, wasn't it--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Can you explain the, can you explain this? Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I, I chose the title 'Showing My Color' because these were personal essays and--about race and how it's affected me. And I remember from my childhood, you know, the elders of my community and my parents [Page's adoptive parents, Maggie Williams Page and Clarence H. Page], you know, would say, "Now, don't be showing your color when we go out to this affair out here or when we go downtown," et cetera, et cetera. And that was the etiquette of the times and it is something that African Americans know right away, the kind of irony with which black culture has grown up and, what, nurtured itself through the generations; that we know that color is something we are both proud of and also something that we can be ashamed of, if other people bring down the race, if you will, back in the language of Booker T. Washington's era (laughter), you know. We must uplift the race. And so that, that sort of, what I call positive political tribalism is one of the underlying themes in the book. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And so, what's your favorite part of the book? Speaker 2: Favorite part of the book. Oh, good question. Now, you know, it's twenty years ago. It's interesting 'cause I--because twenty years ago, remember, we were in a different era than we are now. Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] was president. The O.J. Simpson verdict [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995] had just come down. At the same time, Oprah Winfrey was on top of the ratings. Michael Jordan was about the most popular man in America, along with Michael Jackson. The two Michaels as I called them (laughter) at that time. Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was being seriously talked about as a candidate for president, and I was pushing it. I wanted him to run 'cause I wanted to see--first of all, I thought he, I thought he'd be a great president. And I thought that this would be real test of, of race in America and of America's racial attitudes that, I mean here was a black Republican, what, a decorated military veteran, handpicked by the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] and Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] administrations to, to lead our, what, national security and all and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, et cetera. And I mean, what more could you ask for in a candidate that white America ought to appreciate, including conservative Americans. Well, he didn't run, it turns out really because, in my view, the--well, the religious right, in particular, was opposed to him because he was pro-choice on the abortion issue or he wasn't rabidly anti-abortion as they would prefer. And that was a big--they, they waged a war on him, and, and they told him that if he did decide to run for president, they were going to oppose him vigorously. And I'm not saying that that was the only reason he had for deciding not to run, but he knew he was--he would be in for a vicious white--fight from the religious right, as Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] ran into. But Obama won anyway, but then again, Obama ran some years later. So I don't know how, what would have happened if Colin Powell had run back at that time. But I was encouraged though by the fact that Colin Powell was as popular as he was. And so that--we're talking about my favorite part of the book? I don't know. There were a lot of parts that I really liked. I would say one favorite part that I was very disappointed didn't get more reaction was one that was headlined, "Middleman Minorities" because that one I talked about how the--first of all, one of the biggest problems in the black community was the, the near death of entrepreneurship insofar as building economic capital. And it, it had eroded after the civil rights revolution because we went out and desegregated ourselves out into (laughter) the mainstream society to such a large degree. And the black-owned businesses that we do have are disproportionately owned by immigrant black folks. And in New York City [New York, New York] in particular, tremendous--(unclear) to say a large percentage of black-owned businesses, owned by immigrant blacks or first generation, first-second generation immigrants. And God love 'em. I, I have nothing against black immigrants or other immigrants. Anyone--body, who want to come and, and help build this country as a productive citizen, that's what made America strong. Now, what I always wonder about is what's happened to the native black folks (laughter), those like me, descended from American slavery? Why has entrepreneurship almost died among us; and this is something that my book begins to deal with and tries to get a conversation going on the, how African Americans are becoming more diverse in our own ranks. Story_ID: 673227 Speaker 1: What did you think about the Million Man March? That was '95 [1995]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --that's just before your book came out, but-- Speaker 2: I thought it was a--a marvelous, remarkable event. I was there, and I said, boy, here's a, here's a Woodstock [Woodstock Music and Art Fair] for black guys, you know, because you had--you might have had a million people out there, frankly, 'cause it was enormous. And yet it was orderly, it was peaceful, and everybody was happy. Everybody was really upbeat. And I think it was something African Americans needed at that time. I think that it was, well, the first March on Washington, it wasn't asking Washington [D.C.] for anything, wasn't asking [U.S.] Congress or the White House for anything. It was really more of a, well it was sort of what the Evangelical crowd would call a revival, a spiritual revival for the African American community, especially for black men who, number one, had been feeling knocked about and largely powerless for dealing with the problems in our own community, like the high crime rate among our youths, the crack wars. That epidemic had just passed through at that time, and the problems like that--(unclear) the incarceration rate was starting to go through the roof. And there was a lot of negativity in the black community, and I think that black men--and black women too for that matter, but certainly the focus was black men with this event, needed to get together and feel like, yes, there are things I can do to build my community. And I am not alone. That's the main thing, that there are others who feel the way I do, and we can work together to change attitudes and put an image out there on television and to the media and to the public that shows, yes, we can do something to help ourselves. It was really a marvelous event. I don't know anybody who remembers what Louis Farrakhan [Minister Louis Farrakhan] said (laughter), you know, you know. But he, but Farrakhan--and it's probably just as well 'cause some of what he said was so embarrassingly inaccurate, but like he went on and on about the height of the Washington Monument and didn't have the numbers right, you know, it was really--anyway, it didn't matter, you know. That was the irony. Having Farrakhan as the head of this thing gave it an edge and publicity and drama. It made Americans talk about it and look at what was going on, and there was fear that a riot was gonna break out because when I, when I got up and went downtown that morning, I was amazed. It looked like downtown was (laughter) it looked half deserted, and they say, you know, most of the white folks didn't come to work that day. I don't know if it's true if most of 'em didn't or whatever. But it was certainly easier--let's say it was easier to get a parking space downtown D.C. that morning which never happens. A lot of folks didn't come into town 'cause they didn't know what was gonna happen on the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.] that day. And it turned out to be a peaceful, productive, just a really well-run event. And that in itself made news. But I think that we did see black community crime rates go down after that, but they were already declining since about '94 [1994] from their, from a high to which--what, their lowest since 1964, '65 [1965], you know, a thirty-year low that occurred there in the late '90s [1990s], but though the economy was improving too. But I think this was an important event for black folks. It was also an important event for white folks to see that--to get a glimpse into the diversity of opinion in the black community 'cause the opinions represented on the Mall that night are not the opinions you normally see on the evening news for, coming out of black America. Speaker 1: Right, right, right. Story_ID: 673228 Speaker 1: Do you have a post mortem on the Clinton presidency? He was called the first black president at that time. Speaker 2: At that time, it was fascinating, yeah. I think we've a lot to learn from Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] about how to deal with diverse communities. He came up in Arkansas, a small, poor, conservative state. He was governor. He got voted out of office because he had too many broad ideas with his Harvard [sic. Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] education and this kind of thing. While he was out of office, he reacquainted himself with his own people, Arkansans, and ran for office again, this time with a very simple appeal with, you know, no more than one, two or three talking points; and got back in office, was very successful, helped pull the Democratic Party back from the far left, back to the sensible center in my view. And in 1992 was elected president and ended a twenty year dominance by Republicans; from 1968 to 1988, Republican presidents were elected in five out of the six elections. Since 1992, Republicans have lost the popular vote in five of the last six elections. And Bill Clinton started that in 1992. And it's a--and now we see the demographics have shifted so that Republicans are gonna have a much tougher time getting elected unless they have a good minority outreach of some kind to blacks, Hispanics, Asian Americans and unmarried women. And Bill Clinton, I think turned around the idea that you, you were just gonna win on southern strategies or race card pitches alone. A lot of Republicans still have yet to learn that lesson (laughter) because they go out with real negative campaigning and attack ads. It shows a real lack of creativity and imagination that, I think--it doesn't mean necessarily Hillary Clinton's [Hillary Rodham Clinton] gonna get elected, but I think she definitely has an edge on her side right now unless Republicans move back to the sensible center with somebody like Jeb Bush, somebody like that, but like that. We'll see what happens. Story_ID: 673229 Speaker 1: Well, the election of 2000 was controversial, and settled by the [U.S.] Supreme Court. Did you have any, any thoughts about that, the Gore election or-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --not his--well, his campaign and the-- Speaker 2: Well--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: --election of George Bush--W. Bush [President George Walker Bush]? Speaker 2: I think Gore [Al Gore], quite possibly could have--well, I mean whenever you get a close election, you can always think of a lot of things that people could have won by. But I look less at Florida than at West Virginia because there was a state that had voted Democrat (laughter) consistently for decades. And all of a sudden it turned to the Republican side because the National Rifle Association waged a very effective $25 million ad campaign against Gore, portraying him as somebody that wants to come and take your guns because Gore lost West Virginia. He lost enough votes that would have put him over the top to get elected president. Ever since then now Democrats have been scared to death of going up against the NRA. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, interesting point 'cause a lot of people have never mentioned--well, I've never heard that before, you know. That's tr- you're right. Speaker 2: It's absolutely true. Ask any Democrat--(laughter) they'll tell you (laughter). Story_ID: 673230 Speaker 1: Two thousand one [2001], you talked about a controversy between Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] and Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]. Sharpton was heralded himself as the next generation I think--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, well, he--and I think that that's, definitely showed itself to be largely true. Well, if there's a--Al Sharpton is younger than Jesse J- a lot younger than Jesse Jackson, younger than me. He's, what he was--boy, I went to the New York World's Fair [New York, New York] back in '64 [1964], '65 [1965]. And Al Sharpton was there. He was about, I think twelve or thirteen, a young preacher (laughter) there at that, at that big event. And he was, what, James Brown was his mentor and adopted him. And he became James Brown's road manager and all. So Al Sharpton, I started covering him in the late '80s [1980s] with the Tawana Brawley c- controversy. And, you know, he's always impressed me as a guy who didn't take himself as seriously as Jesse Jackson does, and I've been covering Jesse Jackson since '69 [1969] when I came to Chicago [Illinois]. But Sharpton has always had a lot of show biz in him that was really right up front, as much as Jesse Jackson has had the, the church more upfront and the old legacy of the Civil Rights Movement. Sharpton is definitely more of a TV generation baby. And he has mellowed since the Tawana Brawley days. He was sobered by being nearly fatally stabbed during a march in Brooklyn [New York]. And when he almost died, he had a reassessment of his life, and has become less of the wild man and more of a pragmatist since then. But I think what's most significant now about Sharpton is, he's got his own TV show ['PoliticsNation with Al Sharpton'] on MSNBC which in some ways expands his voice and in other ways corals his voice (laughter) because TV works both ways with those who have TV shows. You can ask Jesse Jackson 'cause he's had TV shows in the past too. Speaker 1: Yeah, it tends to homogenize you in some ways. Speaker 2: Yeah, it's funny. That's the irony of, of the media, and I'm always fascinated by that ever since I saw Marshall McLuhan speak back in the '60s [1960s], and he, he had his laws in the media, one of which was, every new innovation reverts to a former version of itself. And it's very interesting. I didn't know what he meant at the time, but now, as I get older, I see more and more examples of it, like when my son [Grady Page] and his friends--I can't--we never could keep our son in a wristwatch. And as a teenager, he and his friends, none of 'em wear wristwatches. They all used their, their cellphones as a watch. And I, I said, ah, it's just like my granddaddy used to have a pocket for his pocket watch in his vest (laughter), you know. Nowadays, kids have a cellphone, we're going back to that--you know, that's, Marshall McLuhan was right. And I see the same kind of thing happening when I see, what, street leaders of, of civil rights organizations getting their own TV shows. They begin to mellow back to the homogenizing influences of television. Story_ID: 673231 Speaker 1: I'm gonna jump ahead to the Obama campaign. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: And, now, this is something that a lot of people didn't see coming. Did you--what was your opinion of his candidacy? Speaker 2: (Unclear) oh, speaking of son--here we go. Hey, Grady [Grady Page]. Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Yeah, when did you--okay, when did you first become acquainted with Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barak Obama]? Speaker 2: My wife [Lisa Page] and I first met Barack Obama in Chicago [Illinois] at the Black Creativity Gala at the Museum of Science and Industry back when he was first running for the state senate. And impressed us right away. I--my feeling was, I hope he's not too good to be true, you know, 'cause that district [13th Senate District] especially had had controversial people holding it in the past, like Gus Savage and it was the--don't let me forget his name. Now, goodness, the congressman [Mel Reynolds] right before Barack Obama who went to jail for controversy with a, with a teenage girl. And in any case, you know, we Chicagoans are accustomed to being disappointed by (laughter) great, promising, young politicians. And, but he hasn't let me down. When it came to a time when he was being talked as a presidential candidate after his 2004 speech to the Democratic convention [2004 Democratic National Convention, Boston, Massachusetts], I robustly came out in favor of his running for the job. I said, you know, I don't know if you're gonna win, but it would be great to see--just like with Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] in 1996, what I was hoping to see was a test of where we've come with racial progress in this country because both would be--Colin Powell or Barack Obama would be great candidates, offer Americans a good choice; and it would also be a test of how much would race play a part in either their victory or their loss. As it turned out, I would say the biggest surprise for me about Barack Obama's election was it overturned the Bradley effect, as we call it, which goes back to the days of Tom Bradley when he was running for governor of California and lost, even though the polls indicated that he was about to win. And it was concluded that because he was black, white voters didn't wanna tell the pollsters that they weren't voting for him. And enough of them, apparently said that, that he surprised everybody by losing. Everybody wondered if that would happen to Barack Obama. It's happened to other black candidates who were trying to be crossover candidates. As it turned out, Barack Obama benefited from the opposite effect. There were a lot of voters in Republican districts who had indicated they were gonna vote for John McCain, who apparently voted for Barack Obama (laughter) because the, the--well, when the results came in, you could see what had happened. So that was a big surprise to me 'cause I think our society is--it also s- it says something about the way politics are gerrymandered, I think, too, that in some districts people are so conservative or so Republican that they don't even wanna tell the pollsters they're voting for the other party's candidate. And the same thing with Democratic districts. But it certainly showed me that race ain't what it used to be in American politics. Speaker 1: Now, do you see a lineage between, I mean from Barack Obama's campaign that goes back to the Harold Washington days? Speaker 2: Well, it's an interesting lineage. Barack Obama didn't know Harold Washington. He came to Chicago while Harold Washington was mayor, and Washington died before Obama ever met him or got close to him. But Obama says he came to Chicago partly because Harold Washington was mayor, and he wanted to see close up how Washington did it and how he was running the city and all. And certainly, a lot of the people in communities that influenced Harold Washington influenced Obama like Reverend Jeremiah Wright [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr.] who was the kind of minister I remember from covering Washington's campaign and others. He was the kind of go to guy on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] that any politician went to who wanted to get black votes. There're certain churches you went to, and Jeremiah Wright was one of 'em. Now, Barack Obama went to Jeremiah Wright's church [Trinity United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois], met Reverend Wright, and Wright became a spiritual mentor of his. And he brought his family there and joined the church, and it was a--I could see why, you know. It's fascinating to me, that relationship, because Jeremiah Wright was a, was a very strong personality for a young man who had, whose own father [Jeremiah A. Wright, Sr.] had so famously abandoned the family and all, as Barack commemorates in his book ['Dreams From My Father: A Story of Race and Inheritance,' Barack Obama]. And I think that, that whole story was fascinating to me, and it was a--so I--a lot of what shocks the conservatives from outside Chicago about Barack Obama's relations with--relations with Jeremiah Wright and other folks back in the Chicago context, don't surprise me at all. But it certainly shows the great divergence between right and left in this country, and not just politically and racially, but culturally (laughter). Story_ID: 673232 Speaker 1: Do you find it difficult--you were saying earlier that, you know, it's hard for you to keep up with what's going on in local D.C. politics, and-- Speaker 2: Yeah, I have very little motive to do so. I don't have kids in D.C. schools [District of Columbia Public Schools]. I don't live in D.C. I don't--haven't had the motive to keep up with D.C. politics except as, as a curious observer of the city where I go and park and work (laughter) just about every day. Speaker 1: But the same--if, if--I would guess that if you were living in Chicago [Illinois], you would know more about Chicago--not just because you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I certainly would. Speaker 1: --you had lived there for a long time already, but just because it's the kind of place that compels that kind of attention. Even if you live in the suburbs, you're gonna be (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Well, this is what's different about D.C. from any other city in America, that it is a big government town, which is kind of like living in a big college town, you know, where the college dominates the, the town, but the college also represents a community that is different from the town community (laughter). That's the way Washington, D.C. is. The federal government, state department [U.S. Department of State], the embassies, national media--all of this dominates D.C. At the same time though, it is separate from the day-to-day lives of most work a day, District of Columbia natives, if you will, 'cause they are operating in the same kind of a local milieu that any other town would. But they have the benefits and burden (laughter) of the federal government right there too. Story_ID: 673233 Speaker 1: Today, I mean the issues you're writing about--I was, I was looking at some of the columns online, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --the column about the rancher out in-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --Nevada and the-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: You even sang a song on (laughter)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --on the video that you composed--did you compose that yourself? (Laughter) I guess you--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I was moved to put this to song just before, five minutes before I sat down in front of the camera 'cause I say, now, this is, this hear lends itself to a ballad (laughter) you know, I mean this is a Western drama going on. Speaker 1: Okay, I mean it's--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: That's the fun you can have doing videos, though. You know, I'd like to do more of that. I usually am, I'm in too big of a hurry to be very elaborate about it, but it is fun to operate in a way that's--besides the printed page. Speaker 1: Okay, so you've gone from a kid who stuttered at one time, who didn't speak a lot, couldn't, to--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Oh, I spoke a lot. I just stuttered a lot too (laughter), that's all. I've always been a talker (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, well, you--now, you're (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I mean some stutters just don't talk, you know, but Clarence Thomas, you know. Clarence Thomas, I caught an interview with him once on C-Span where he was talking to some middle school kids and they asked him why he didn't talk more during [U.S.] Supreme Court meetings. And he, he usually tells people because, you know, well, "I can get everything from the briefs. I don't really have any questions there to ask." But with these kids he went into a story about how when he was a kid, he had a Gullah, rural Gullah accent down there in Georgia, and he stuttered. And other kids made fun of him, and so he, he just didn't talk much. And he kind of got in that habit of listening more than talking. And I thought that--I was touched by that because I grew up as a stutterer too and accepted--I did just the opposite. I just kept on talking. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Talk more. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah, but now you've got a, you've got like two platforms to perform on, on some level--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you write the column, and you also appear in the video. Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think even more than that, there's Twitter and Facebook. This is the era we're in now, I wish Marshall McLuhan were around now to give us his perspective 'cause he anticipated, predicted this kind of thing in, in his basic principles of how society, humans and media interact. And his first, in his first book, the 'Mechanical Bride' ['The Mechanical Bride: Folklore of Industrial Man," Herbert Marshall McLuhan], you know, talking about how we kind of marry ourselves to--those are the early days of TV era, back in the '50s [1950s]. And he was already seeing how, between TV and the advertising worlds, that we were marrying ourselves to, to the technology in ways that were unprecedented since Gutenberg [Johannes Gutenberg] invented the printing press, four hundred years ago [sic.]. Story_ID: 673234 Speaker 1: With so many platforms now, how is that marriage working out, do you think? Is it--are we--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: We're, we're in the middle of chaos right now. It's (laughter), it's interesting, you know, just like any kind of marriage. You go through hard times and confusion, then you go through a lot of excitement, and then you--disappointment and blah, blah, blah. It's, the biggest shock I think came around 2008, 2009 when all of a sudden--I remember right after Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected, after he was inaugurated in 2009, suddenly the bottom seemed to fall out of the biggest--I mean we've had some layoffs before, some reductions, but all of a sudden our Washington bureau [of the Chicago Tribune] and other Washington bureaus and their staff back in Chicago [Illinois] and The New York Times, Wall Street Journal, everybody. Suddenly, it was laying people off or retiring people early and all. I survived for some reason, but, you know, it was quite devastating for those of us who were the, who were going through it, who had either been laid off or forced out or, or who had survived it. Everything had changed. And everybody knew that we were gonna have to adjust to this new era now, and do what we could with it. We never stopped covering the news. This is the great thing about (laughter) us as journalists, the way we are. But we never stopped covering the news. The paper could--papers came out every day. The broadcasts came on, on time. But behind the scenes, it's been rather chaotic. It's settled down now. For one thing, I mean I, I think the hubris of the bloggers has subsided a bit 'cause, you know, there are a lot of bloggers around saying, "Ah, we don't need you old dinosaur meat anymore. Now, we got, us free wheeling bloggers out here," blah, blah, blah. Well, bloggers gotta be accountable just like everybody else. There's some good bloggers. There's some boring bloggers, and who cares you know. And all of us have to compete for our audience's time. They--the most viable thing is their time. And when I came in this business in the '60s [1960s] we were taught that the average reader had twenty minutes a day for their news. So we had to compete for that, their attention during that time. I say--they got less than that now, the average reader, looking at it statistically. So we're all competing for the, for the audience's time, whether they're readers, viewers or listeners. And but I find it invigorating. As long as I'm working, I find it invigorating that, the challenge of grabbing and keeping an audience, serving that audience and competing against other people for that audience--that's really, I think it's, it's given me a new sense of, of vigor unlike any I've had since I came into the business. Story_ID: 673235 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --is there anything major that you would have done differently if you could go back and change it? Speaker 2: I can't think of anything. I, I sometimes you know wonder about that if I had moved to New York [New York] or L.A. [Los Angeles, California] or something early on, but, you know, I've been so fortunate in this business, for one thing, of the opportunities I've had, that I have not felt like I've missed anything. I, I've been happy with the opportunities I've had. There are some opportunities I, I didn't take more advantage of. For example, I'm sorry it took me this long to get another book ['Culture Worrier: Selected Columns 1984 - 2014: Reflections on Race, Politics and Social Change,' Clarence Page] out since, you know, since 1996, not that I haven't been working on what that next book was going to be. I just haven't (laughter) completed the process of, of writing that next book 'cause it was so much other stuff going on. And so I could talk about that, but, you know, it's--I've had so many opportunities, again, that I haven't had much time to sit around mope about, oh, if only I'd done this or that. It's really--I just wanna take advantage of the opportunities I have. Story_ID: 673236 Speaker 1: It would have seemed to me that some of the new technology today would be right down your alley with all the, all the appearances that you have to make and-- Speaker 2: Yep. Speaker 1: --you know, writing a column, a regular column, I mean--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yep. That's another set of opportunities there that I've had, long before--I tell people I was multimedia before multimedia was cool. I was already--I've, I've worked in--different times in my career, I've worked in newspapers, television, radio. I freelanced for magazines, and I've even been in a Hollywood movie, 'Rising Sun' with Wesley Snipes and Sean Connery, yeah, back in '92 [1992]--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Did you play a newsman in that-- Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, playing, playing a Washington newsman. How about that for a stretch, right, and it happens in Washington [D.C.] too. You know, you got so many Hollywood shows and all shooting here that they would often to bring in professional people who've got recognizable faces from TV and stick 'em in the movies. I also--you can hear my voice in the background in 'Murder at 1600' with Wesley Snipes too (laughter) 'cause, they got a TV on, and there's 'The McLaughlin Group' and a scene that me and the rest of the group shot just for use in this movie there (laughter). So you can kinda see my face out of focus in the background and hear my voice arguing with my fellow panelists. Speaker 1: John McClain--I mean John McLaughlin says, (imitates) "[HistoryMaker] Clarence Page," you know like that, and--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, (laughter) the usual barking. Story_ID: 673237 Speaker 1: What do you think about new journalists, I mean new black journalists? Are, is there any one that's promising that you think? Speaker 2: Well, what I find--well, there're promising journalists who I'm sure you've never heard of 'cause, 'cause they're young, and they're promising (laughter). But Wes Lowery [Wesley Lowery] who is just fresh out of college. He was editor of the Ohio University Post [The Post], my own alumni--my own college newspaper, which I worked on years ago. He's now at The Washington Post, very, very bright young man who started getting scoops that got him on CNN. He got a--what, some, a scoop in connection with the Trayvon Martin case that got him onto a CNN talk show when, while he still a senior at Ohio U [Ohio University, Athens, Ohio], and he went on from there to the Boston Globe and then to the, to The Washington Post. And he was only a couple of years out of college, and NABJ, National Association of Black Journalists, had already given him an award as a up and comer [Emerging Journalist of the Year] you know (laughter). There's some very bright, young African American journalists out there, and we're seeing people--this is the interesting thing about--I know you didn't ask me about this, but I'm gonna say it because it's very important that, that the Internet has brought a new opportunity and changes to black media, who--which have a long history in this country, going back to the 16--1700s, the black press gave us Frederick Douglass and so many other great folks, Ida B. Wells and others. Now, the Internet has come along at a time when it is well suited to the African American community that we've gotten robust websites like TheGrio and The Root. Ebony has found new life on the web. Jet has found new life in a web-only format. This is something that we have been waiting for in African America, and some very talented voices are coming along. And we've got a real robust debate, the taboos that we used to not go near like color consciousness and various other stories or issues, we do that now. We hash 'em out on the web. Black Twitter as it is called is a new informal relationship between people on Twitter which has given us like the story of the Nigerian school girls who were kidnapped, over three hundred of them, was not getting much attention in the mainstream media. But Black Twitter, starting with a lawyer in Lagos [Nigeria] who got it onto the web, Bring Back Our Girls, turned into an international Twitter-based movement, they go all the way to the White House and helped to generate a response after years of similar atrocities happening. Suddenly, now, we've got American troops on their way and--over there to look for these girls. I mean this is the kind of thing that has happened now in this new era. So, which I'm excited to be around to see this much of it. I hope the Lord will spare me to be around to see more of it. Story_ID: 673238 Speaker 1: Now, when you look back over your career-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and everything you've done to this point, what would you consider to be your professional legacy? Speaker 2: That's a good question. My legacy? Gee. I (laughter), I guess I'd have to be dead to find out (laughter), but--I don't know. I, I think--I'm trying to think of a couple of the tributes that people had so generously given to me, that--rather surprised me. But, 'cause I still didn't view myself as the old, humble scrivener and pencil pusher and all. But I don't know. I think I was lucky enough to be part of a, of a generation of change that made my job pursuits into milestones. I was, you know, the third black reporter in the Chicago Tribune's newsroom. I was the first one of the now defunct Dayton Journal Herald newsroom. I've been able to either be first or be among the first African Americans to experience certain new platforms in the media, and be part of the new black middle class that emerged back in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s]. Feeling as insecure as any other pioneer generation can feel, but looking back, now we realize how much we were part of change in this country. So I guess that's about as best I can do as far as legacy goes, besides the first three words of my obituary, a Pulitzer Prize winner [Pulitzer Prize for Commentary], right (laughter). Which always carries, it carries a certain cache of its own, but I like to think of myself in terms of what--I asked Thurgood Marshall at his last news conference, as it turned out, how would you like to be remembered? And he immediately said, he did the best he could with what he had. And I can't think of a better way to be remembered. Story_ID: 673239 Speaker 1: Well, tell us a little bit about your family? Speaker 2: What do you wanna hear? Speaker 1: Well your son [Grady Page], you got a son. He's how old now? Speaker 2: My son is now twenty-four years old. He's in community college here, looking toward transferring over to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] and majoring in psychology. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: He had his chance with journalism and turned it away from it[KS1]. We'll see if he comes back. Speaker 1: How did your parents feel about your career? Speaker 2: Oh, my parents were quite shocked and dismayed when I said I'm going to be a journalist (laughter), my mother [Page's adoptive mother, Maggie Williams Page] especially, because she wanted me to be a doctor so badly. My dad [Page's adoptive father, Clarence H. Page] was, you know, he was a little more lenient. He was just happy I wasn't, apparently headed to jail. But it wasn't until I--well, wasn't until the first time my parents saw me on television after--I'd been all the way, at the Chicago Tribune about nine or ten years. My parents saw me on television giving a TV report, they just beamed like I hadn't seen them smile since I gave my first Easter speech when I was in the first grade [at Garfield Elementary School, Middletown, Ohio]. So they--let's say that before they passed, they adjusted to the fact that I wasn't going to medical school. Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything else we need to talk about that we haven't or anything that I haven't raised that, that you think we ought to inject into this interview or-- Speaker 2: About my life? I think we covered it pretty good there. I think, 'cause there were several things I kind of interjected on my own (laughter). Speaker 1: Well, that's good. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but we got in there anyhow, so--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: Well, you were telling me off (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: I appreciate your coming to talk to me. I'll put it that way, frankly, 'cause I'm very humbled by this opportunity, and if you've seen me on 'The McLaughlin Group' and all that, humility is not something I openly display very often (laughter), but I really feel that way now. Speaker 1: Well, you have to be tough on that show. Speaker 2: Absolutely (laughter)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Unclear) all of 'em (unclear), you know. Story_ID: 673240 Speaker 1: But I, I'm gonna ask this. We always ask these two separately, legacy, and how you'd like to be remembered (unclear)--(simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: --you answered 'em both the same. I'm gonna ask it again, just to--and, sir, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: Well, you know, I asked Thurgood Marshall that question at his last news conference, and he gave an answer that I thought was remarkably appropriate. He did the best he could with what he had; and Time magazine, the following week used that as the headline on their big story, just used that quote, and I said, boy, you know, that's really certainly how I wanna be remembered 'cause I w- I've been given a lot of opportunities, and I hope I, I did the best I could with them and made my parents [Page's adoptive parents, Maggie Williams Page and Clarence H. Page] proud (laughter)...