 Story_ID: 659855 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please. Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange, N-T-O-Z-A-K-E, S-H-A-N-G-E. Speaker 1: All right, now this is a name that you adopted in 1971, right (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was given to me by two South African exiles, Endico [ph.] and Nmusa Ava [ph.]. And they lived in Oakland, California. And I would go there to visit Thulani Davis and James Plunkett [ph.]. And I asked them if they could give me a name because I thought it was hubris to give myself a name. So I wanted some South Africans or Africans to give me a name. I wanted a South African name because South Africa felt closer to me than Nigeria because South Africa had a system of segregation that was based on the southern version of segregation called apartheid. And so I decided I wanted a name from a country that was more like my country. And so these two South Africans observed me perform once and then one day out of the blue they said, "We have your name." And they gave me twelve pages of written text and told me my name was Ntozake Shange. And I was so intimidated by my name because it says, "She who has her own things, who walks like a lion." And I was so intimidated by that that I put the twelve pages in my lingerie drawer and did not open it for two years. And finally in Boston [Massachusetts] when I was unpacking my things from Los Angeles [California] to go to graduate school at the Boston University in American studies, I was unpacking my things and I found these twelve pages about my name. I read the twelve pages and felt empowered and it was in Boston that I started using my name Ntozake and I stopped signing things Paulette Williams, and started signing poetry Ntozake Shange. And I introduced myself to people by that name. And I worked with a group called Collective Black Artists as a poetry coordinator of our nightclub. And we had musicians, jazz musicians and poets from all over perform in our space. And that's where I--that's what I did in Boston. Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the club? Speaker 2: I can't remember (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. But I just wanted to establish your name and what it meant and, and how it's pronounced. So many people-- Speaker 2: Ntozake, that's how it should be. But in America we can't get that last A, so I just let it go (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Ten, eighteen, nineteen forty-eight [October 18, 1948]. And I was born in Trenton, New Jersey. I stayed there 'til my father [Paul T. Williams] joined the [U.S.] Air Force as opposed to going to Korea. The choice he had was he could live with the soldiers on the base and not live in officers housing, or he could protest to live in officers housing, which was white. And they said if he did that, he'd go to Korea. So my father chose to live with the soldiers. And we simply had an enlarged version of a barrack for the family of six that we were, 'cause there were four children and two parents and a nanny. So we lived with the soldiers. Speaker 1: And this is when? Speaker 2: That was when I--that was before I went to kindergarten. So I started kindergarten on the Air Force base [Sampson Air Force Base, New York] in an Air Force school for children. And that's where I was first--that was my first experience of racism because that--at snack time, this little white girl said that she didn't serve niggers milk. And then I went home and asked my mother [Eloise Owens Williams] what a nigger was. And that's when I found out. So it was when I was five that I was introduced to oppression. Speaker 1: So this is 1954 I guess (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Story_ID: 659856 Speaker 1: Before we get started usually in depth, we ask five questions, they're kind of lightweight questions, they're kind of a warm up. But we're kind of already warmed up, but I--I'll ask 'em anyway. Ma'am, do you have a favorite food? Speaker 2: My favorite food, oh wow, that's so hard. I'd have to make it plural. I like South Carolinian seafood gumbo. I like tuna sushi. I like Cuban black beans and rice and fried plantains and boiled chicken. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color? Speaker 2: Gosh, I guess my favorite color is a variation of, of, of blue. Variations of blue. Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year? Speaker 2: Yes, springtime. Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination? Speaker 2: My favorite vaca- Bermuda. Speaker 1: And the last one is: do you have a favorite phrase or saying? Speaker 2: (Pause) Not my will oh Lord, but thy will expressed through me. Story_ID: 659857 Speaker 1: So I'm gonna ask you a little bit about your family history, your mother's side and your father's [Paul T. Williams] side. Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My mother's name is Eloise Owens [Eloise Owens Williams], E-L-O-I-S-E, Owens, O-W-E-N-S. Speaker 1: Okay. And what is her date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Her place of birth is Midtown Manhattan [New York, New York]. I think it was 1923. Speaker 1: Okay, and what can you tell us about her side of the family? Speaker 2: They were South Carolinians who moved to Midtown Manhattan in the early '40s [1940s], no it was in the, it was in the '20s [1920s] that they moved to Manhattan because my mother was born in Manhattan, as were her siblings. So they moved in, in, in the early '20s [1920s] or the late teens [1910s] from Charleston [South Carolina] and Edisto Island [South Carolina]. And they were Geechees although my grandmother said that that was a very small part of the family and not to talk about it. And (laughter), my grandfather [Frank Owens] on my mother's side came from the hill country called--and he came from a town called Allendale [South Carolina]. And it said that his father was the sheriff of Allendale because they were so light skinned that they often passed and they were, they were allowed to do so even though some people knew they were colored. So my great-grandfather was the sheriff of Allendale. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Are there any stories that go back any further in that part of the country? 'Cause I know that part of the country is (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. There were--we came from a family--from two twin sisters, oh my goodness. I just learned their names, Phyllis [ph.] and Sarah [ph.]. And we're descendants of Phyllis, my family is. And I know the descendants of Sarah who are my fourth and fifth cousins once removed. And I know them, my generation of them and their children. And my, my family was descendants of Phyllis. And that's about all I know because we haven't designed them yet on the genealogical chart. So I can go as far back as my grandmother. And I don't know her mother's name, although at one time I did. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So-- Speaker 2: So my grandmother's family name was Viola Venzina Murray [Viola Murray Owens]. Story_ID: 659858 Speaker 1: And my [maternal] grandfather's name was Frank Owens. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Frank Roswell Owens. And he was, he went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and was, was trained to be a master carpenter. And he came to New York [New York] and passed for white and got a job with the carpenters union and worked in Manhattan [New York] building buildings and making furniture. And when he died, they didn't wanna give my grandmother [Viola Murray Owens] his pension money. And there were actually articles in The New York Times and the Herald Tribune [New York Herald Tribune] about the trial that the union took my grandmother to, to forbid her this money. And then it was proven that my grandfather was black and they had just assumed that he was white, and she got her pension. But there were newspaper articles about it. Speaker 2: Well that, that's interesting. That's something that, that's a story--that's a really interesting story, you know. I guess they were embarrassed that they didn't know-- Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: --all this time, but. Speaker 1: So, so your mother [Eloise Owens Williams] was raised in New York? Speaker 2: Yes in the Bronx [New York]. They moved from Midtown Manhattan, 5th Avenue [sic.] and 8th Avenue--55th Street and 8th Avenue. They moved to Fulton Street [sic. Fulton Avenue] in the Bronx. Speaker 1: How did your, your grandfather deal with his social life? Did he just not go around the white people at work and--? Speaker 2: No, no, he didn't go around the white people at work. He, he stayed with the black people in, in the Bronx and in Midtown Manhattan and in Brooklyn [New York]. And he was very proud of being a black person, although he had serious color biases and was disappointed when one of his children turned out to be light brown with nappy hair because that's not how his family looked and he didn't expect his family to look any different. But my grandmother, who was also a, a, a tawny sort of color, had genes that changed the way the children looked (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, okay. That you know, could it be that it wasn't just color prejudice, but economic, I mean it kind of threatened his econom- his economy too if his children looked black, or (unclear). Speaker 2: Right. His children never met the carpenters. Story_ID: 659859 Speaker 1: So your mother [Eloise Owens Williams], now she had a chance to go to, go to school and go to college. Speaker 2: She went to Hunter high school [Hunter College High School, New York, New York] and Hunter College [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Okay. Did, did she have any stories about growing up that you remember that you could tell us? Speaker 2: Yes, she--my grandmother [Viola Murray Owens] arranged for her to take elocution lessons. So she was always reciting black poetry to us. And always correcting our grammar and our diction. And that was part of her remembrance of elocution. And she also had feelings about being called the white mouse because she was very pale. And this one lady would just shout at her, "You little white mouse." And because she was short, and she was shorter than her classmates. And this hurt my mother's feelings. And that, that, that, that pain followed her through most of her life. Whenever she talked about it, tears would well up in her eyes. Speaker 1: Okay. So she was bullied in school. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Now did she go to school with other black children? Speaker 2: Yes, all her friends were black and Jewish because Hunter was black and Jewish and Chinese. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And her--she had Chinese and Jewish and black friends, and West Indian friends included with the Carolinians. Although the Carolinians had a little enclave where they lived in the Bronx [New York]. There were also a lot of West Indians in the Bronx at the same time. So a lot of my mother's friends that I came to know as a child, were of West Indian descent. Speaker 1: Okay, and your mother became a psychologist? Speaker 2: A psy- a psychiatric social worker-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --and then later a social work administrator. Story_ID: 659860 Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us? Speaker 2: My father's name is Paul Towbin Williams [Paul T. Williams], P-A-U-L, Towbin, T-O-W-B-I-N, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S. Speaker 1: And is his date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Nineteen nineteen [1919], December 18th. Long Island, New York. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: But he was raised in a town called Lakewood [New York] where my grandfather had a window washing business. Because Lakewood was a restricted town because Jewish people couldn't live in other seaside towns that were WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] re- and not, and restricted for Jews. So Lakewood had big houses that needed their windows washed. So my grandfather learned how to speak Yiddish and cleaned the windows for the Jewish people. And he was an independent businessman. But before he was that, he had a farm. And my father was born on the farm. And then my grandfather sold the farm and went into the window washing business. He also made violins that he sold to people who wanted violins. And I would say that he was a follower of Booker T. Washington as opposed to Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], whereas my mother's [Eloise Owens Williams] family were followers of Du Bois. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And there was always a tension about that in the family. Speaker 1: Okay. Yeah, 'cause that was an issue in those days. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Is there a story about how your grandfather learned how to make violins? Speaker 2: He learned at Tuskegee--not Tuskegee, he learned how to do that in Canada because my father's family had migrated during the, the Underground Railroad. They had gone from Virginia, they made it to Canada. And so both my father and grand- my father's father and my grandmother's mother were in Canada and my grandmother was born in Canada. But my father's people migrated back to Long Island and my father was born in Long Island. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now did your, your father have any stories about growing up? Speaker 2: Did daddy have any--yes, he had one story that I used in one of my novels 'cause it was so funny. He thought he was looking at a parade and he called my grandmother to the window to see the parade. And my grandmother said, "Put your head down, that's not a parade, that's the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK]" (laughter). But my father was a little boy and he thought it was a parade. And I always thought that was so funny because it was so dangerous and so naive. And so like a child to be fascinated by costume and, and, and decorative act- things in a procession. Story_ID: 659861 Speaker 1: Now your father [Paul T. Williams]-- Speaker 2: Went to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania]. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Pennsylvania? Speaker 2: Lincoln in Pennsylvania. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was a men's school then. And he went--and, and he went to school with Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah]. And also with Bruce Wright [Bruce M. Wright], the judge, and a poet, he was a poet as well. And who else was in daddy's class? [HistoryMaker] Roscoe Lee Browne. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: And-- Speaker 1: The actor and--yeah. Speaker 2: I don't remember who else was in daddy's class, but there were a number of notable black men who were in his class from Lincoln. Speaker 1: Was he taught by Nnamdi Azikiwe? Speaker 2: I don't know. Speaker 1: I know Azikiwe was there 'til I guess the--around 1950 or so. Speaker 2: Well daddy graduated from Lincoln in 1941 I think. And then he went to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and he was in the class of '44 [1944]. And that class produced a lot of surgeons and pediatricians and obstetricians. And they met annually and had annual fundraising things. And they were one of the classes that donated money to Meharry every year. Speaker 1: Okay. So he became a surgeon. Speaker 2: Yes. He became a surgeon after he left the Army [sic. U.S. Air Force], we went to St. Louis, Missouri. And Daddy went into residency at Homer G. Phillips Hospital [St. Louis, Missouri], which was a black hospital, and one of the few hospitals in the country that allowed black doctors to have residencies in specialties in medicine. Speaker 1: Yes ma'am, that's such a familiar path. When I, when I saw that he became a surgeon and you all moved to St. Louis, I wrote down Homer G. Phillips. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I didn't know it, but I was gonna ask you about it. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And my mother [Eloise Owens Williams] worked at Homer G. Phillips as a social worker. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So, so that's why the family is in St. Louis, right? For (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For five years. Story_ID: 659862 Speaker 1: Before we move on, tell me when you, when you consider your parents' personalities and their dispositions and how they looked, even how they walk and talk, who do you think you take after the most? Speaker 2: Oh wow. I take after both of them. I have my--well they were both race people. And they, they were committed to the uplifting of the race. And they were very civic min- they belonged to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Urban League [National Urban League]. And they belonged to the Alpha--my father [Paul T. Williams] was an Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], and my mother [Eloise Owens Williams] was an Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], and they were very active in community work that the sorority or the fraternity did. And my father belonged to the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], which was a collection of black professional men who studied and listened to one another talk about their professions and what was going on in their fields of business. And they were able to help each other in that way. And my mother belonged to The Links [The Links, Incorporated] who did community work. And The Girl Friends [The Girl Friends, Inc.] who I don't remember as doing community work. But they were a black society of socialites-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --of a certain class. And we belonged to Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] from the time I was about eight I think, until I, I outgrew, until I left high school [Trenton Central High School, Trenton, New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And-- Speaker 2: And, and about their personalities. My mother--they're both Sagittarians. So they both had--they were both very gregarious and they both had great senses of humor. And they, they both were intellectually driven and were always studying in their fields as well as keeping abreast of activities in the black world. Being in a segregated city like St. Louis [Missouri], on the street where I lived, all the black people lived. So we lived with Haitians and West Indians and Africans and Puerto Ricans, and East Indians. And anybody who was of color had to live in the black section of town. So it was very international where I lived. Speaker 1: Was this The Ville [St. Louis, Missouri]? They call it-- Speaker 2: This was on Windermere Place. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: In north St. Louis, across from Soldan High School [Soldan International Studies High School, St. Louis, Missouri] and Clark school [Clark Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] where I went to elementary school. And I would have gone to a new high school called Western--Northwestern [ph.], if I had stayed in St. Louis for high school. But my father finished his residency [at Homer G. Phillips Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri] and moved us back to New Jersey. So I went to high school in Trenton [New Jersey]. But his personality was very international. He listened to Latin music all the time, and he collected African instruments. He had conga drums and bongos and claves and cow bells and all kind--and castanets, all kinds of African and Spanish instruments. And my mother loved the art. She loved theater and ballet and what else? Theater and ballet mostly. And my father fancied himself a painter and did all the yearbooks at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] when he was there. He designed them and did all the artwork. And then he would occasionally take art lessons and paint. So we still have some of daddy's paintings, each one of us 'cause there are four of us. I have three siblings [Ifa Bayeza, Paul T. Williams, Jr. and Bisa Williams]. Story_ID: 659863 Speaker 1: I have my sister who's a brilliant playwright. Speaker 2: Yeah, can, can you name them all? I guess in the order of their birth (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, my sister Ifa Bayeza. Speaker 2: Now is she the oldest? Speaker 1: No, I'm the oldest. Speaker 2: Okay, so you're first. Speaker 1: So I'm naming them in order they were born. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: Ifa Bayeza the brilliant playwright. And my brother Paul [Paul T. Williams, Jr.] who is a phenomenal lawyer, who had his own law firm on Wall Street when he was in late twenties and early thirties. And then he moved on to work for the State of New York as the head of the Department of Institutions and Acquirements [sic. Dormitory Authority of the State of New York] or something like that, that was in charge of all the New York State buildings and, and land, and the finances related to buildings and land. It was a very important position, and it was statewide. So he traveled a lot throughout New York and was responsible for the rebuilding of Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York] and the addition to Harlem Hospital that modernized it and restored the murals that were done by the WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] in the '30s [1930s]. Story_ID: 659864 Speaker 1: Now we, we talked about Ifa Bayeza your sister (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --and your brother Paul Williams, Jr. [Paul T. Williams, Jr.] I guess. Speaker 2: And my baby sister Bisa Williams is an ambassador, retired ambassador from the state department [U.S. Department of State]. She was ambassador to Niger. Speaker 1: What's her name again? Speaker 2: Bisa, B-I-S-A. And my other sister's name is Ifa, I-F-A. And my brother's name is Paul-- Speaker 1: Okay, so-- Speaker 2: --Williams. Speaker 1: So the baby sister was, is an, was an ambassador to-- Speaker 2: Yes, she was an ambassador to Niger. Speaker 1: Okay, is she still serving? Speaker 2: No, she retired this past winter. And now she and my brother have a consulting firm called Williams Strategies Associates [sic. Williams Strategy Advisors, LLC]. And they work on infrastructure projects in Africa and Latin America, building with governments--their government buildings and water projects and, and agricultural products. And anything that needs funding and direction, they work with the, with the entrepreneurs or the governments to help them to facilitate the building of whatever thing it is they're working on. Speaker 1: Okay, now this is--and you have a--your family, everybody's accomplished and involved in some, something that, that almost--some global activity almost. Speaker 2: Well, that comes from living on a street [Windermere Place, St. Louis, Missouri] that was, was globally connected. We were raised with people from all over the world. So when I came back east and the black people were all English speaking, and from the South it was quite a shock because I wasn't used to that. I was used to an international community. And I missed that about St. Louis [Missouri]. I, when I moved to New Jersey, I found it to be more segregated and limiting than St. Louis was. Story_ID: 659865 Speaker 1: Now tell us about--we always ask this question about growing up: what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up? I guess in, St. Louis [Missouri] I would guess. Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that I loved about where I lived was that you could walk down the street and you could hear music from every house 'cause every house had the radio on or the stereo on. And you could go walking down the street and just be surrounded by music. And it was just wonderful. And the smell I remember is collard greens mostly. And broiled sausages and ribs from barbecues. And pies, pies, they made a lot of pies, the women on my street [Windermere Place]. And what else? Lawn mowers and what else did I hear? The smells, I heard, what I heard, I told you what I heard. I heard children playing. I heard music. (Pause) And if you walked far enough, you could hear the streetcar and buses, you could hear buses and the streetcars. Story_ID: 659866 Speaker 1: St. Louis still had streetcars. I took the 101st streetcar halfway to my school and then I took a bus because I went to the gifted program that was far away from my house. Speaker 2: Okay, now this is an integrated school, right? Speaker 1: It was--I went to a predominantly black elementary school. And when I was put in the gifted program, I was the first black student there. Speaker 2: What was the name of your black school? I mean the-- Speaker 1: Clark Elementary School [St. Louis, Missouri]. Speaker 2: Okay. Speaker 1: And the, the gifted program school was Dewey School [Dewey Elementary School; Dewey International Studies Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri]. It wasn't far from Clayton, Missouri where a lot of black people moved when they moved to the suburbs. Clayton was one of the suburbs. Speaker 2: Okay. So Dewey School I take it was named for John Dewey? Speaker 1: Yes, and it was very, very white. And I was continually asked if I was Greek or Italian because they, they knew I was darker than them, but it was unfathomable that I could be a black person until Patricia [ph.] came. And Patricia was brown skinned and Patricia and I made friends. And then they figured it out. And we were never invited to people's houses and we would have sleepovers and none of the white girls would show up. And we were called names by children who weren't in the gifted program. We were called chocolate drops and niggers and Hershey bars and what else did they call us? I don't remember, but there were a lot of names. But the one, you know, chocolate drop was so diminutive, and nigger was something I was accustomed to, so I wasn't surprised by that. But Hershey bar (laughter)? So I lived with that with the white people. And, and then there was some pushing and shoving, but it never got awful. Our buses that took us to Dewey School, 'cause my sister came later, my sister Ifa [Ifa Bayeza] came later after I had been there I think a year or two. She came and entered the program. And a guy named Henry Alexander [ph.] entered the program, and he was in my class. And then my color bias showed up because I was always made to dance with Henry and I just didn't necessarily wanna dance with Henry 'cause Henry was so dark. And Henry made me feel very self-conscious. And so when I grew up and became famous, I refused to do a interview with the Village Voice unless they put a flag on the front page that was an apology to Henry Alexander. So I, so I--they did it and I did the interview. Speaker 2: Well that's an interesting story. They actually put an apology to Henry. Did he see it? Speaker 1: I don't know, he lives in St. Louis, Missouri, I have no idea. But as far as I was concerned, I had made my apology. Speaker 2: Okay, okay. Speaker 1: To the world I apologized to Henry Alexander. Story_ID: 659867 Speaker 1: The influences on you growing up, I mean you had--I read that you had tremendous amount of influence at home because of the visitors who would come to your house (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: And who came to your house and why did, why were they there? Speaker 2: Because my father [Paul T. Williams] sought them out. My father and mother [Eloise Owens Williams] would go and seek them out. So Tito Puente, Ray Barretto, Miles Davis, Dizzy Gillespie, Chico Hamilton, Mongo Santamaria, Lalo Schifrin, Sonny Til from the--Sonny Til and The Orioles, the doo wop singers. And Chuck Berry lived next door, so Chuck Berry would come by sometimes. And all kinds of doctors and politicians whose names I don't remember, but who were important in their fields because you must remember that there were no hotels that took black and Latin people of color. And so prominent black families with large houses would sometimes allow these artists to stay in their homes. And I think that's one of the reasons we came to know so many people. Speaker 1: So they would actually stay with you instead of-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Well what hotels were they gonna stay in? All the black hotels might be filled. Speaker 1: Yes. So (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And there weren't that many black hotels (background noise). Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: So we're talking about some of the visitors to the house-- Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: --and a lot of times they would stay at your house because they couldn't stay in (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Du Bois came. Speaker 2: Yeah, Du Bois came and you had--you had mentioned the Latin all stars. Speaker 1: Mongo Santamaria, Tito Puente, Lalo Schifrin, Mongo Santamaria, Chico Hamilton, Dizzy Gillespie-- Speaker 2: Yeah, Miles Davis-- Speaker 1: --Miles Davis, W.E.B. Du Bois, Oscar Micheaux. Speaker 2: It was Lewis, right? Lewis Michaux [Lewis H. Michaux]? Speaker 1: And Lewis Michaux, and we have a book by him that he autographed and gave to my father. My sister has it in a glass case. And, and-- Speaker 2: Which one was it? Do you remember the title? Speaker 1: No I don't know, it's my sister's. And it's opened up, so I can't see the title. Speaker 2: So your family was friends with Paul Robeson too right? Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: And W.E.B. Du Bois, now he would have--that's before he moved to Ghana I guess. Speaker 1: Yes, and he didn't like children very much. So we were kept sort of in the background when he was there. Speaker 2: Any stories about him? Because I've been collecting W.E.B. Du Bois' stories. Speaker 1: No, all I know is that we were not allowed to bother him, we had to stay upstairs. Speaker 2: Okay. Seems like everybody who meets him has a story about him, you know. Story_ID: 659868 Speaker 1: Any stories about Paul Robeson? Speaker 2: Let me see. Well he and my mother [Eloise Owens Williams] would have long talks about poetry and politics. And my mother tried to convince him that communism was not the way to go. My mother was a very patriotic American, and she would get involved in these conversations with Robeson about how he, he mustn't get too close to Communists or the government was gonna do something terrible to him because of the House Un-American Activities [House Un-American Activities Committee]. And she told him this and she would get--her voice would get very loud. And she'd say that he had to remember that he was an American and Americans were, were, were against communism. And communism was dangerous. And she belonged to the, she belonged to some group that was more radical than the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], but she stopped being in it because they got to be too close to the left and she didn't want her name associated with anything that was too close to communism. Speaker 1: Was that CORE [Congress of Racial Equality]? Was that CORE? Speaker 2: No, no, it was--it started with an A. Speaker 1: Okay. I'm not sure what it would be, but-- Speaker 2: It started with an A and it had three words in it. But I can't recall what it was. Speaker 1: Okay. Now-- Speaker 2: But they got too close to communism. And I would do things like watch the House Un-American Activities on television. So I would see McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy] and those awful questions he would ask people. And I would get very afraid. He made me afraid watching those hearings. And my mother told me I didn't have to watch them. I told her it was the news and it was America and I wanted to know. And I watched the McCarthy hearings and 'American Bandstand.' Speaker 1: Now you were quite young watching McCarthy hearings. Speaker 2: Yeah, I was little. I was like four and five. Speaker 1: And you were watching the McCarthy hearings? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: This says something about your, you being a gifted student, you know. Speaker 2: Well it was intriguing to me because I couldn't understand why they were shouting. And my mother would explain it to me, you know these were--they thought they were Communists and that you mustn't sign your name to anything associated with communism. Speaker 1: Now we discussed on the elevator up here that we grew up in an era, we're about the same age, where the African countries-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and Caribbean countries becoming independent. Speaker 2: Independent, right. Speaker 1: It was in the news. Speaker 2: It was on the news and they were my neighbors. So they, they would be talking about it. Story_ID: 659869 Speaker 1: Now what about spirituality? Did, did your parents go to church or did you--was it-- Speaker 2: My mother [Eloise Owens Williams] was a very Christian woman and she was a Presbyterian. The whole little colony of South Carolinians in the Bronx [New York] became Presbyterians, and they were led by a preacher Edler Hawkins [Edler G. Hawkins], who eventually became head of the presbytery [Presbytery of New York City], which is the organization, the religious organization that reigns over the Presbyterian church. Speaker 1: Worldwide. Speaker 2: Yes. And Edler Hawkins was a black man who was instrumental in the lives of the South Carolinian community in the Bronx. And up until--as they started to die off, it started to end. But they all, they always had events in honor of Edler Hawkins and I did a concert at a fundraiser for the Edler Hawkins scholarship fund. And I worked with Calvin Bell [Calvin B. Jones] and Ronnie Burrage of the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]. We did this concert. And-- Speaker 1: This is much later right? In the '70s [1970s] (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, this is after he had died. And I--it was a concert to raise money for the scholarship fund. And it was the same grown up people who were children in his Presbyterian church, who may have changed their religion when they got older, but they always gathered around Edler Hawkins. When he came to visit us, he asked if I had any questions about the church (laughter). And I said they needed to have some more stain glassed windows and some incense and some candles (laughter). And he said, "Well, we don't believe in doing things like that, ours is a plain church, ours is a simple church like Christ." And I said, "Well, it should be growing things and it should have beautiful things in it and it should be very lush because Christ worship, worshipping Christ is a rich experience and the church looks so poor" (laughter). And my mother said she couldn't believe I told the head of the presbytery that I wanted a church to be Catholic (laughter), but I did. That's what I told him because that's why I didn't like going to church because it was so barren and dry. And they didn't sing spirituals or get happy. And there was nothing like the church our nanny took us to, which was a Baptist church where people would get happy and faint and get the Holy Spirit and talk in tongues and I--that's where my nanny took me and I liked that church. And also I liked to go to Mass with my friends in St. Louis [Missouri] whose families were from New Orleans [Louisiana]. And I would go to Mass with them sometimes and I found that to be very mystical and alluring. And I went to Mass with my cousins on my mother's side who were Catholic, had lived in Sugar Hill [New York, New York]. And I--we went to Mass one time and Frankie Lymon was there. Speaker 1: This is Frankie Lymon and The Teenagers right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: That singer. Speaker 2: Yes, he was a singer. And so I went to Mass with Frankie Lymon and it made my year. I couldn't stop telling people that I had been at Mass with Frankie Lymon. It was like meeting, meeting Sidney Poitier or something, later on I mean. But it was like a startling event. Speaker 1: Well it seemed like you would have felt kind of special having all those celebrities in the house anyway, I mean-- Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know they were celebrities then. I just thought they were friends of my father [Paul T. Williams]. Speaker 1: That's interesting. Robeson [Paul Robeson], Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], Miles Davis you know, that's an amazing array of people. Now was your father religious at all? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: (Pause) He just didn't-- Speaker 2: He would go to church with mother if she pestered him, but he, he did, he wasn't-- Story_ID: 659870 Speaker 1: Where do you think you got your, your values in terms of right and wrong and that sort of thing from? Speaker 2: From both of them [Shange's parents, Eloise Owens Williams and Paul T. Williams]. Speaker 1: Okay, so all right. So it didn't matter which one was going to church or not. Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because I didn't like the church I went to. So I was more like daddy in that sense. But I had a yearning for some kind of spiritual experience that I found in, in the holy roller churches. And then I found it in poetry and novels. I grounded myself in fiction and, and poetry because nothing else seemed to be close to the kind of uplifting that I thought religion should have. Speaker 1: Okay. Now I've read that you've read most of the classics about--when you were little, or a lot of them. But did you have a favorite, or favorites? Speaker 2: I liked Euripides and I liked Aristophanes, and I liked Mark Twain and Dickens [Charles Dickens], and Sinclair Lewis, and, oh what's her name? Not Edna St. Vincent Millay, although I did read that, but Edna Ferber, I liked Edna Ferber. And Racine [Jean Racine], Baudelaire [Charles Baudelaire], Andre Breton, Gunter Grass, Marx [Karl Marx], I can't think of any others. Speaker 1: Okay. Were you influenced by television and the movies when you were growing up a lot, or-- Speaker 2: I liked black and white movies and I was inspired by movies like 'It Happened One Night,' 'Imitation of Life,' 'Stormy Weather,' the one with Jimmy Stewart [James Stewart] where he has a dream and the town loses all its money and then on Christmas, and they play it on Christmas Eve. Speaker 1: 'It's a Wonderful Life.' Speaker 2: 'It's a Wonderful Life.' I like Frank Capra movies and I like Barbara Stanwyck movies and, oh 'Mildred Pierce' and 'Stella Dallas' influenced me. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now these are, yeah those last two, about women that go through a number of trials and travails before they get to the end of the story, yeah. Okay. What about song--I mean music was a lot--music played any--well I guess with the Latin music you were saying your father was really into that (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. And Billie Holiday was important in my family, and Sarah Vaughan. Billie Holiday, Sarah Vaughan, Ella Fitzgerald. [HistoryMaker] Gloria Lynne was a favorite of mine. One of my aunts was a--well all of my aunts played violin and piano, but one of my aunts played marimba and xylophone, her name was Dorothy Stallworth. And she played in nightclubs all over New York and New Jersey. And she played all over the West Indies in the summertime at hotels. And she played music in the cocktail hour at these hotels in, in the West Indies in the summertime. And in the winter she played in nightclubs in New York. In the day time she taught school. But the Williams sisters; Thelma [Thelma Williams], Barbara [Barbara Williams], Ora [Ora Williams] and, and Dorothy, played violins and, and xylophone all over New Jersey and New York. But they played classical music. Speaker 1: Okay. So this is a rich, artistic background-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --or a rich intellectual background. Story_ID: 659871 Speaker 1: Did you start writing, when did you start writing creatively (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it was really funny. I wrote a poem in high school [Trenton Central High School, Trenton, New Jersey], just one about Vietnam [Vietnam War]. And it was about a picture I had seen in The New York Times of a little Vietnamese girl whose clothes were tattered and everything around her was burned down from Agent Orange. So there was just this black starkness behind her. These stripped trees, and a little white doll with its head off. And the poem I wrote was about the state of the girl and the head off of the white dolly. And how painful that image was to me. That's what the poem was about. And it was--they published it in the literary magazine at my school, at my high school. And then I didn't write another poem 'til I was at Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York] and I was sitting on a terrace and this white girl came up to me thinking I was Thulani Davis. She came up to me and said my poem was due in by five o'clock. And so I went home and wrote a poem and turned it in by five o'clock. And that's how I started writing and the literary magazine ended up publishing two black girls instead of one because Thulani Davis published her poem, she got hers in by five too (laughter). Speaker 1: Now that's funny. We're gonna pause here again. That, that's funny. Story_ID: 659872 Speaker 1: Now when you're still in St. Louis [Missouri], we were talking about your first writing, but one important thing we didn't discuss was your father's activism, right? Speaker 2: Right. Well my father [Paul T. Williams]--well one funny thing that they did, is they belonged to this club that used to have black civic leaders come talk to the group. And one time they had the John Birch Society (laughter). I'll never forget the John Birch Society had come to recruit these black people and, and, and we had all this material from the John Birch Society. And I told my father, I said, "Daddy, they don't like black people. What were they doing here?" 'Cause I had read the material and I said, "They don't like us, daddy, why were you entertaining them," (laughter)? Speaker 1: Did a, did a black rep from John Burch Society (simultaneous)--? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was white people. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: It was all white people and I was just alarmed. Speaker 1: I think they had one black member that I know of, that was George Schuyler, you know. Speaker 2: Yeah, but George Schuyler used to write nasty letters to Crisis magazine [The Crisis]. And his daughter [Philippa Schuyler] did something else, she was famous too. Speaker 1: Yeah, pianist. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: She was a piano prodigy. Speaker 2: Okay, well I knew his daughter did something. And I know he was a, he was an anti-black progress anything. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's a strange, you know, yeah, he has a strange story, yeah. Speaker 2: Well we had Crisis magazine and Ebony and Jet and Tan magazine subscriptions. So all those magazines came to the house and I would read all of them. And one of my big ambitions was to be in People Are Talking About, in that section of the magazine. Speaker 1: In Jet, yeah. Speaker 2: And I never made it, even though I have a publicist, I never made it into People Are Talking About. And one time they did have a little article about 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange], but Johnson publications [Johnson Publishing Company] didn't like us very much, even though they, they, they hosted a big lunch for the cast of 'For Colored Girls' in Chicago [Illinois] and me, they had a big lunch for us and took all these pictures. But they never did an article about us. Speaker 1: Yeah, I wonder how that happened. When they, they did that and then never publish it (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They boycotted us because of all the controversy. Speaker 1: Okay, we'll get to that-- Speaker 2: And don't forget Chicago is where they had the fist fight. Speaker 1: Yeah, we'll talk about that later-- Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: --when we get to the, 1977. Story_ID: 659873 Speaker 1: The family moves back to New York when you're thirteen (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) New Jersey. Speaker 1: New Jersey. And you go to high school-- Speaker 2: I was thirteen. Speaker 1: Yeah, thirteen, and you go to high school in New Jersey. Speaker 2: In Trenton [New Jersey]. Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the name of your school? Speaker 2: Trenton Central High School. Speaker 1: Okay, and how did you like it after leaving--were you in the gifted (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I hated it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I never went to lunch in the cafeteria, I would eat food I made from home on a stairway on the second, leading to the second floor, which was not used 'cause everybody else was in the cafeteria. But I went to a very racially segregated school. I'm gonna--I have all these, I'm so--Trenton was so racist. What occurs to me are bad words for every ethnic group. So I, so I went to school with Italians, Lithuanians and Czechoslovakians. And they had gangs that didn't like the black people, so the black people had gangs that didn't like the white people. And there were always all these fights. And I experienced one where the girls at Trenton High School had something called Sports Nite, and it went on for five days. And there was the red team and the black team. And this was done by families, families had generations who belonged to one or the other team. And my family obviously didn't have any such tradition. So I belonged to the red team because I thought belonging to the black team might bring me bad luck. And so I was in the red team and I invited a friend of mine, Judge Booth [William H. Booth] from New York [New York], his daughter, Gini Booth, was my guest to see me dance on Sports Nite 'cause I was on the dance team. And when we got out of the, of the, of the, the program, my mother [Eloise Owens Williams] had come to pick us up. And the Italians were surrounded the car and all the cars of all the black people from the Sports Nite with crowbars and chains and zip guns and just metal bars. And they were attacking people walking and the cars. And we had to still let my sister [Ifa Bayeza] in, so we had to open the door. And we had, and we had--mommy said, "Open the door quickly and let her in before she gets hurt." So we opened the door as quickly as we could and we tried to slam it, and her leg got caught and I said, "Move your damn leg, we're gonna get caught in--by these guineas." And, and so she got her leg in the car just as they hit the car, and my brave mother, she was so brave. She managed to drive the car out of this crowd that was surrounding all the cars, beating the cars up and trying to break our windows. But mother drove us through that and got us home safely. But that's the kind of school I went to. And we, we had to stop having public football, basketball games because there were too many stabbings. So there couldn't be any audiences to Trenton High's basketball team. Speaker 1: Yeah, that really sounds like chaos. Speaker 2: Oh, it was a terrible school. Speaker 1: Did--in spite of that, did you have, did you find good, good instructors there or teachers? Speaker 2: Yeah, I had two Miss Ferrys. There was a Miss Ferry [ph.] spelled with a Y who was Irish, and there was a Miss Ferri [ph.] spelled with an I who was Italian. And I had both of them and Mr. Hamar--Mr. Habas [Marvin Habas] and I had an Italian teacher, Mr. Chicolara [ph.] who hated me. I was the only black student in a program called the humanities program, and I was the first black student who had ever been in it. And he just hated me. And, and there was this prize that went around to all the black gifted kids in the country. And all my friends from Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] got this award because their homeroom teachers recommended it for them. And my--and he refused to recommend me, so I didn't get this award when I was like a really good student. And that really hurt my feelings because I knew that it was his fault. And he just did his best to ruin my life while I was in high school. Story_ID: 659874 Speaker 1: What were you thinking about in terms of college in those days? Were you-- Speaker 2: My mother [Eloise Owens Williams] told us we were going to a Seven Sister school, or we could go to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] because that was the family school. But we couldn't go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], and we couldn't go to Bennett [Bennett College, Greensboro, North Carolina] and we couldn't go to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia]. It was either Fisk or at a Seven Sister school. So I applied to Fisk and Seven Sister schools. So I got into Pembroke [Pembroke College in Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] and Barnard, I didn't get into Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and I didn't get into Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York]. And so Pembroke which is, was part of the girls, part of Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island], which eventually was consumed by Brown and lost to us. I got in there. And I went there and I was very impressed by the black kids I met at Brown. But I didn't wanna go to school with boys. And the classes there were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why not? Speaker 2: --inter- were heterogeneous. Speaker 1: Well why not? Why didn't you wanna go to school with boys? Speaker 2: Because at my school [Trenton Central High School, Trenton, New Jersey] girls were like second class citizens. They had an, an auditorium session with all the girls in the school to tell us that cramps didn't exist. And there would be no more acceptance of doctor's notes saying that we had cramps, which is medically untrue. But girls were treated with derision and low expectations at my high school, and boys were given preference. And so I, I really didn't wanna have that experience again. So I wanted to go to an all-girls school. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So I take it you had good grades in school. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and what kind of counseling--did you get any kind of counseling from the school? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: My mother told me what I was doing, where I was applying and what, what was my, what were my options. Speaker 1: So, so you're accepted by Barnard College and why did you choose to go there? Speaker 2: Because it was in New York City [New York, New York] and close to dance studios and, and to Broadway shows and off-Broadway shows. And Harlem [New York, New York], it was close to Harlem. You could walk to Harlem, go to the Ap- we used to go to the Apollo children shows on Saturday for half price. And I saw young Stevie Wonder, The Flamingos, I saw James Brown, I saw [HistoryMaker] Smokey Robinson and The Miracles. I saw Chuck Jackson. I saw Bo Diddley. I saw all the black rhythm and blues stars for half price at the, at the, at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] 'cause we could walk there from Barnard. And we'd walk there on Saturday mornings. And we would also go see the Jewel Box Revue at nighttime. And we would go to amateur hour ['Amateur Night at the Apollo'] on Wednesday nights because it was so much fun. And we went to the black bookstore [African National Memorial Bookstore, New York, New York] and we got, we got--went to lectures there and we, we saw black poets reading on the corners. And we saw--oh, what was her name? Queen Mother Moore, Queen Mother, Queen Mother-- Speaker 1: Audley Moore. Speaker 2: Audley Moore. We saw her, and we saw Olatunji [Babatunde Olatunji] and all these frequenters of Harlem who would be out and about on the street preaching and, and, and selling their wares of black nationalism and black national culturalism. And it was just intriguing and I knew Barnard offered me that. Story_ID: 659875 Speaker 1: When you came out of high school [Trenton Central High School, Trenton, New Jersey] it was 1966, but when you were in high school, Malcolm X was still in New York [New York] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right I was--I wrote an essay about Malcolm X. And for my weekly essay, and the comment on it from Mr. Chic- not Chicolara [ph.], from Mr. Giovanni [ph.] was, "Aren't you beating a dead horse?" And that hurt my feelings 'cause I wrote a eulogy for Malcolm X 'cause it disturbed me immensely that he was gone and that someone had shot him, and that Muslims had shot him. Really blew my mind because I read Muhammad Speaks [Muslim Journal] every week and I just wasn't prepared for that. And I had been leaning towards Malcolm X's philosophies as opposed to other groups that I had been introduced to, like CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and the youth NAACP [NAACP Youth Council]. I, I, I didn't feel comfortable with them. I felt comfortable with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and, and Malcolm X. Speaker 1: Okay, and you said I think during the break that-- Speaker 2: And my father [Paul T. Williams] and mother [Eloise Owens Williams] used to take us to all these sit-ins and demonstrations in New Jersey. And they took us to the March on Washington. So we were there for that. Speaker 1: So you were about fourteen then. Speaker 2: Yes. We went with--on the bus to the March on Washington-- Speaker 1: Did you then (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the whole family. Speaker 1: Okay. When, when--did you hear Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speech? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and at the time did you think it was historic or? Speaker 2: I thought the whole thing was historic. I saw Bayard Rustin and I saw A. Philip Randolph. And I saw all these people who were instrumental in black history, in modern black history. And I knew who they were. And I was very astounded by being--and I saw Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]. And so I was like astounded that they were all together, and there were all these thousands of black people there. And I felt a great sense of, of (unclear) and pride and power. I thought there was power at that group because we came from all over the country and we numbered in the hundreds of thousands. And I just felt wonderful about being there. And I wished it could go on forever, all this sea of black people. It made me very happy to see that many black people. Speaker 1: Okay, so as we end--get towards the mid-'60s [1960s], towards the end of the '60s [1960s], is the era of black power. Speaker 2: Power, I, I, I, I went to the first black power conference in Newark, New Jersey. And I heard Milton Henry, who was from the Republic of New Afrika talk and I was really impressed with him. I saw the Chuck Davis dancers with whom I later studied, and, and became friends with Chuck Davis whom I talk to on the telephone now. And he calls me by my first name. And I saw Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] and Rap Brown [H. Rap Brown; Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] and--Li- I didn't see that, I didn't see him. Who, who else? Huey Newton [Huey P. Newton]. There was such a--Roy Innis. There was such an array of, of different black groups at this black power conference, and there were black nationalists all dressed up in African garb. And there were SNCC workers in jeans with jean shirts with the tee shirts out of their pants. So it was quite a display of the different arenas that black power was manifest in. And the assemblies of the groups were really intriguing because there were all these political discussions and dissensions. But it was all done passionately and nonviolently, and it was just wonderful. I felt really empowered after I left there. Speaker 1: Okay, this is the one in Newark? (Unclear), yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it was in Newark. Story_ID: 659876 Speaker 1: At Barnard College [New York, New York], was there a black--was there black studies at this point (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We made a--no there wasn't a black studies, but we had a group called the Barnard something sister society [Barnard Organization of Soul Sisters]. And the acronym is BOSS, it spells it spells BOSS. And it's still alive and students still belong to it. And Thulani Davis and I started it along with Christine Clark [ph.]. We were inspired to gather the black girls at Barnard, there were only twenty-four of us in my class. But in the other classes there were fewer. And they didn't really join us, it was mostly freshman and sophomores who belonged to BOSS. And we just had meetings and, and, and a kind of sisterhood of sorts. And we didn't make a manifesto or anything. But we met together and sponsored dances. I know we did that, that we invited Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] boys too. And there were also these things called Spook Weekend, when the black kids from Ivy League schools would descend on one college or another in that town. There was one at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] one year, and there was one at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] I went to. And there were always disruptions between the black Ivy students and the townies, the black townies. There was always tension between all these Ivy League black kids and the townies--I mean by townies, the black people who lived in the town or the city and are, are falling on them in great numbers and having the time of our lives, and they weren't invited. And so there were, there were some altercations with the townies at, at Yale that really were very rough. And in Cambridge [Massachusetts] it just was a matter of them trying to intimidate us. But, but I always was aware of the fact that we were looked upon as intruders and, and so after my sophomore year I didn't go anymore. Speaker 1: To Barnard? Speaker 2: To Spook Weekend (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean to the, to the Spook Weekend, okay, okay. Speaker 2: But we called it Spook Weekend. And that, that was-- Speaker 1: The term spook in those days, you know, meant black folks. Speaker 2: Right, right and that's what we called it (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just want to point that out because some- somebody listening now wouldn't even know that. Yeah, yeah, Spook Weekend. Some of those, you know, terms splib and spook and all those kinds of things, yeah. Speaker 2: They've died out-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --although I still use (laughter), I still use 'em. Speaker 1: Okay, we can't help it sometimes, but-- Story_ID: 659877 Speaker 1: Now you were working on a bachelor's degree in-- Speaker 2: American studies. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Oh, I forgot. Thulani Davis and I edited our first magazine called Phat Mama [Phat Mama: Her Black Mind], P-H-A-T, Phat Mama. That was a collection of poetry and drawings and music of eight black girls from Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York]. And we had illustrations and original scores in there and poems. And we had our book party at the Studio Museum [Studio Museum in Harlem, New York, New York]. And we had four hundred copies of this. And we had gotten a grant from Barnard for five hundred dollars to collect--to make this collection. So Barnard cooperated with us, with us to create a black magazine of poems about black women. And we had our party at the Studio Museum. And we felt very successful and accomplished because we were published. And there are still a few copies around. Speaker 1: Right, Thulani Davis is an important black writer in her own right-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --and has been, yeah. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So this is quite a partnership. Speaker 2: Yes, we're very good friends. I talked to her yesterday. Story_ID: 659878 Speaker 1: Now did you get married at Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York]? Did you (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I was married, but it was annulled. So we don't discuss that. Speaker 1: Okay. Now I think I--the reason why I raise it is because it's--it wasn't a happy situation. Speaker 2: No, it wasn't. Speaker 1: Okay. And it, it influenced later writings and (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So did you want to tell us anything about it at all or? Speaker 2: Well I married at nineteen. And one of the reasons--well I guess it's important to that era. Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION) Speaker 2: I guess it's important--wait a minute. I guess it's important because the reason I got married is because I had just survived an illegal abortion without anesthesia. And I swore to God that I would never go through that again. And the only way I could figure out how I could have sex and get pregnant and not have to have an abortion was to get married. And there was this young man who was very ardently in love with me. So I had romance with him. And when he asked me to marry him, I said yes. But my reason was so I wouldn't have to have an illegal abortion because when I had an abortion, Roe v. Wade [Roe v. Wade, 1973] hadn't come yet. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. But-- Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION) Speaker 1: Okay. So I mean so did this whole series of events cause you to become depressed? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay. All right, and-- Speaker 2: I became anorexic. I, I weighed like ninety-eight pounds. I, I was--I wore a size two and I was accustomed to wearing a size eight. And some of my hair fell out. It was just very demoralizing and scary because he, he used to stand outside my window when I finally got a room at the Fairholm, which was a boarding house that Barnard used for juniors and seniors sometimes. And he would stand outside my window, shouting up to my window, calling me ghastly names and threatening me, and threatening to tell all my sexual secrets as if I had a whole lot. And just threatening me and calling me names in the middle of the street. And this went on for months. And finally he stopped, but it was a, it was a very difficult time. Speaker 1: So this is a, basically assault over a period of time. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And this young--he was a law student? Speaker 2: He was a--well he was a law student, and he thought my reason for the annulment, if he pressured me, would, would make him not be able to go to law school. Speaker 1: Hm, well that's inter- but you're still going to school during this period of time (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I was going to school; I was going to school and doing very well in gymnastics. And I was doing very well in my major. And I was taking courses that I loved. I took a course in modern German literature and modern French literature, and Amer- and English history, and the French Revolution. I had very interesting courses that stimulated me and, and the vernacular in American art taught by John Kouwenhoven [John A. Kouwenhoven] who wrote the book about the vernacular in American art ['Made in America: The Arts in Modern Civilization']. So I had some of the best teachers that I can imagine. And I did very well; I got honors in my major. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. But now during this period of time, did you--is this during the period of time that you attempted suicide? Speaker 2: No, this is afterward. That was after I left college. Story_ID: 659879 Speaker 1: We were discussing, well it's kind of a traumatic annulment-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of your marriage, but at the same time you're going to school and you're being exposed to great classes and professors at Barnard College [New York, New York]. Speaker 2: Yes. And there were always black student union meetings [Barnard Organization of Soul Sisters] and it was during the time of the Columbia strike and Barnard took part, took part in that. And the horses that came chasing us up Broadway and across the Columbia campus [Columbia University, New York, New York], and we took over Hamilton Hall. That's the same time I was working very hard at school. And I, I snuck out of Hamilton Hall because my elocution teacher said that strike or no strike, if you didn't appear for your final performance, she was giving you an F. So I snuck out of Hamilton Hall and did my poem and--to recite my poem in elocution class, it was called speech. The class was called speech. And then I snuck back into Hamilton Hall. Speaker 1: That's interesting that, you know 'cause I've talked to other people who were involved in the Civil Rights Movement who had to go back to school for a test and then go back out in the field. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah. So this is the famous Columbia strike that was on the cover of Newsweek and Time. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: The students were standing--somebody was standing with a gun. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: I remember, yeah. Speaker 2: That was at Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] where they were standing with a gun. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Thank you for correcting me, but this is during the same time period. Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Okay. And what were the students striking about? Speaker 2: We were striking for--to have Africana studies and to have more control over the curriculum. Speaker 1: Just in retrospect, I mean do you think students are still concerned about that kind of issue now? Speaker 2: No, I don't think they question authority at all. Speaker 1: Yeah I, well I've heard people say that. It doesn't really seem like the campus is the same as it was. I mean it's not gonna be exactly the same, but it's not, it's not that level-- Speaker 2: No, no. They don't, they don't do that. Story_ID: 659880 Speaker 1: So you graduated from Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York] in 1970. Speaker 2: Yeah, and then I went to USC. I had a national defense fellowship [National Defense Student Loans; Federal Perkins Loan Program] to go straight through for my Ph.D. And I got accepted at USC's American studies program, so that's where I went. Speaker 1: Okay. So--all right well how did, how'd you like that? So this is, this is University of Southern Cal [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]. Speaker 2: Southern California, right. Speaker 1: All right. Well who were some of your professors and what were you focusing on? Speaker 2: I was focusing on African American art. And my favorite professor was Dr. Patrick Murrow [ph.]. And I had Dr. Lloyd Brown [Lloyd W. Brown], who was my only black teacher. I don't remember my theater hist- my theater history teacher was Dr. Toskin [ph.]. And he was wonderful and I learned a lot in that course. And I learned a lot in my history course, which was a contemporary history course where we were given assignments to research living people and do biographies of living people that he found to be extraordinary. And I was given a black newspaper lady named Charlotte somebody [sic. Charlotta Bass]. I forget her last name, but her first name was Charlotte. And she had founded a black newspaper in Los Angeles [California] that had survived, it was still going on, but she had passed away. Speaker 1: That's the Los Angeles Eagle [sic. California Eagle]? Speaker 2: Yeah. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And I was supposed to write an essay about her. And I succeeded in writing the essay, but I always thought it was incomplete in that I hadn't done enough research. But I got an A minus on it anyway, so I just threw it up to the air and said thank you to the creator for my grade, even though I didn't think I deserved it. And I had, Dr. Lloyd Brown taught African American--African and African American literature. So that's where I was introduced to Zora Neale Hurston and Chinua Achebe. And so I was--so I was well grounded in theater and African, and African American literature while I was there. Story_ID: 659881 Speaker 1: I left there to go study with a professor named Joseph Boskin at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] because he said the American studies program there was fuller than the one at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California]. But I didn't have a fellowship at Boston University, so I had to take out student loans. And that's where I was first sexually harassed in school, but there wasn't a name for it then. There was nothing you could call it. It was just that you had--a teacher had made overtures to me and it was so startling to me and it scared me so much, I dropped out of school. And so that was a turning point and I never got my Ph.D. after that, I stopped even going in that direction. And, and, and, and, and led myself down a path of poetry and social work in New York City [New York, New York] until I moved to San Francisco [California] to be a poet and to study dance. Speaker 2: So, so that's the reason why you moved to--back out to-- Speaker 1: That's the reason why I left graduate school. And I needed to do something, so I taught in New Jersey for a while at Trenton State [Trenton State College; The College of New Jersey, Ewing, New Jersey], I taught for one semester. And I overheard--they had booths in the faculty room, in the faculty office. And I overheard some of the English faculty telling racial jokes. And that disturbed me, even though I was teaching courses that I could design myself. And I was teaching third world poetry and Puerto Rican literature, and African American literature. And I didn't have to teach anything else, I was quite free. But I felt uncomfortable in the department. So I resigned and I went to California in January to study at Lone Mountain College [San Francisco, California], to study dance at Little Mountain College. And the teacher there was named Zack Compton [ph.]. And he was a, a jaz- a modern jazz teacher. But his choreography was really bizarre. And it ended up he had all girl students. And it ended up the last segment of the, of the dance was him in the center of a group of women raising their hands toward him. And I thought that was the most bizarre patriarchal thing I had ever seen in my life. And I was embarrassed to be a part of it. But then I met a young--I had a stage door Johnny there. And I met a guy that I fell in love with named Fulani Carter. And he had locs [dreadlocks] then, which were, which were not popular at the time. But he had locs and green eyes. And he was teaching Head Start. And I thought it was so wonderful that a black guy with locs was teaching Head Start. And so I started going out with him and he was a visual artist. And, and I found him--I went out with him for about a year. But then I stopped doing that and I started going out with a photographer named Jules Allen [Jules T. Allen] who's very famous now. And we're still in touch. And, and after that I had a series of lovers in New York [New York] who have come into their own renown now. And I kept writing poetry and teaching in college. And I did that for thirty years. Story_ID: 659882 Speaker 1: We just mentioned at the beginning that in '71 [1971] you were given the name [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Right. And so you had that name when you were at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] and then when you went to Boston [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts]. Speaker 2: Right. No, I didn't have it 'til I went to Boston. Speaker 1: 'Til you went to Boston. Speaker 2: Right, I didn't use it 'til I went to Boston. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I had it at USC, but it scared me. Speaker 1: All right, so your writing--you're continuing to write and are you writing anything other than poems? Speaker 2: No, I was writing poetry. I didn't start writing short stories until 1973. And I did it on a dare. Another poet, a male poet, dared me to write a short story. So I wrote a short story called 'Carry' [ph.], that later on became 'Betsey Brown' [Ntozake Shange] the novel and 'Betsey Brown' the opera, the rhythm and blues opera. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So in--now what were you doing--so you were in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California] from '72 [1972] to '75 [1975]. Speaker 2: Right. I was teaching at Sonoma State College [Sonoma State University, Rohnert Park, California] and UC Berkeley Extension [University of California, Berkeley Extension, Berkeley, California]. And that's where I taught for those three years. Speaker 1: Okay. And-- Speaker 2: And I belonged to a group called Third World Communications. And it was heterogeneous, we also had a Third World women collective [Third World Women's Alliance], which was an offshoot of that. And we published our own work and we did our own silkscreens and our own drawing and our book was in five languages. And we went on television and did interviews about it. And it was a beautiful book. And it had Chinese, Japanese, Spanish, English and Native American writers in it, as well as visual artists. So that's what I was doing besides teaching. I was doing readings all over San Francisco [California] and Berkeley [California]. And the faculty at Sonoma was very supportive of me and they would show up in the audience. Story_ID: 659883 Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So this is '72 [1972] to '75 [1975], and this is--a lot of things are going on in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California]. Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, you have like, the Panthers [Black Panther Party] are still-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --active, [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis. Speaker 2: Having their b- having their breakfast program [Free Breakfast for School Children Program] and Angela Davis was in court or in jail. And-- Speaker 1: Was it the time of-- Speaker 2: Great upheaval (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) George--yeah. George Jackson? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Just after the aftermath of George Jackson and there's a lot of things going on there. Now you were dancing a lot too right? Speaker 2: Yes, I was dancing with the Horace Tapscott orchestra, which was modeled on Sun Ra. And I had kept threatening to leave graduate school [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] to go dance with Sun Ra. And my teachers kept telling me that Sun Ra would always be there, but I needed to take this fellowship and finish my Ph.D., and then I could go dance with Sun Ra. But I needed to get my Ph.D. first. Speaker 1: Had you met Sun Ra at this point (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I had seen him. And I had seen Wisteria [Wisteria El Moondew] and June Tyson, and I decided I wanted to be one of them. And I wanted to dance with Wisteria. And that was my goal, my aesthetic goal was to dance with Sun Ra 'cause I thought he was the height of black art. I thought he had everything. He had a history, he had the future, he had dancers, he had jazz, he had African rhythms. He had everything that I could ever dream of, and that's what I thought the apex of my life would be, to dance with Sun Ra. Speaker 1: Okay, it's Her- Herman (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I never got to do that, but I did get Sun Ra to bless my daughter [Savannah Shange-Binion] when she was a year and a half old. Speaker 1: Okay, and-- Speaker 2: I took her downstairs at Sweet Basil [Sweet Basil Jazz Club] and sat her on his lap-- Speaker 1: That's in Greenwich Village right? Speaker 2: --and he put his hand on her head and blessed her. Speaker 1: Yeah, Sweet Basil is in Greenwich Village in New York [New York] right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: And Sun Ra who had an orchestra (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Arkestra. Speaker 1: Yeah, Astro Infinity Arkestra. Speaker 2: Astro Infinity Arkestra. Speaker 1: Of about twenty-seven people-- Speaker 2: Twenty-seven performers-- Speaker 1: Um-hm, right. Speaker 2: --if not more. Speaker 1: And the women that you mentioned were the women that danced with him? Speaker 2: Yeah, the women who--they danced and sang. June Tyson sang and danced and Wisteria danced. Speaker 1: Okay. And didn't they live collectively too? Speaker 2: Yes, they did. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So this--all right, so this is compelling. So you were tempted to join? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Okay, and--but you stayed and finished. Speaker 2: I stayed and finished my master's degree. And then I was gonna finish my Ph.D. at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], except my teacher made advances toward me and called me up at home, talking lewdly, and it scared me and I never went back to class. I just dropped out of school. And I never applied anywhere else. I had been accepted at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. So when I left BU, and you have a year's grace period to, to accept going to that school. So I, I went to the University of Pennsylvania to say I'd been accepted and I was interested in coming. And they said I could come, they'd be glad to have me, but there was no money. And I had just been to a school where there was no money, and I decided I didn't wanna to have student debt. So I just ended my seeking out my Ph.D. Story_ID: 659884 Speaker 1: We're almost on 1975 now. Now when did you start writing the poems that would become 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange]? Speaker 2: In 1973. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And they were published as 'For Colored Girls' by Alta [Alta Gerrey] at the Shameless Hussy Press [Oakland, California] in 1974. But the poems were not the same poems that ended up in the theater production of 'For Colored Girls' in New York [New York] because I hadn't written all those poems yet. But I had, I kept I think six poems from my period in, in San Francisco [California], and the rest I wrote in New York. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I wrote "Beau Willie Brown" ["A Nite with Beau Willie Brown"] in Harlem [New York, New York] on 149th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, that's where I lived when I wrote "Beau Willie." I wrote the one about the girl with the sequins on her tummy ["One"] in San Francisco. And I wrote the "Love Poems" in San Francisco. I wrote "I'm a--," "I'm a--," I wrote "I'm a Poet Who Speaks in English, Come to Share the World with You" ["I'm A Poet Who"] in San Francisco. I wrote the "Love Poems" in San Francisco. And "Somebody Almost Ran Off With All My Stuff" [sic. "Somebody Almost Walked Off Wid Alla My Stuff"] in San Francisco. The rest of them were from New York. Story_ID: 659885 Speaker 1: One of your associates in those days was Paula Moss? Speaker 2: Yes, my choreographer friend was Paula Moss. We took dance class together with Raymond Sawyer and his Afro Asian dance company. And we stayed with Raymond and Raymond was instrumental in getting us lights for our first performance. I just found photographs from our first performance of 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] at Minnie's Can-Do Club [San Francisco, California]. We performed at Minerva's coffee shop [Minerva's Owl, San Francisco, California] and Minnie's Can-Do Club and Dance Works [West Coast Dance Works], which was Ed Mock's dance studio. So we had three performance spaces that we worked in. And we had studied with all these people; we studied with Ed Mock and Raymond Sawyer. And we used to hang out at Minnie's Can-Do Club and go hear poetry 'cause she [Minnie Baker Thomas] had poetry nights. And she was open to us having the bar one night to do our performance. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you coined the term choreopoem, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Because I didn't work without dancers, and I didn't see my poetry working without dancers because I feel there's a physicality and visceral nature to what I write. And it's best demonstrated through dance. Speaker 1: Is this, is this a concept that's grown since you coined the expression? Speaker 2: I think so. Other people do them, and they have their own interpretations of them. But it's still a choreopoem. I still don't quibble with them about whether or not it's a choreopoem. If they say it is and there's movement in it and there's language and music, it's a choreopoem. Speaker 1: Yeah, I was--I was thinking about that last night. I said I wonder if she coined the term. Speaker 2: Yeah I did. Speaker 1: Yeah, and I looked it up on the--and they give you credit online for it. Speaker 2: Oh good. Speaker 1: But it, but it wasn't in the bios as such, you know so (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh. Speaker 1: And I thought did she coin that? And you did, yeah. Story_ID: 659886 Speaker 1: The piece is called 'For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide' and then slash, 'When the Rainbow is Enuf' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And I have always been confused about it--but my daughter (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) People keep asking me what it means, and it means exactly what it says. Speaker 1: Okay, well I was told yesterday that they're two different things, they're two different things though they're linked with a slash. 'When the Rainbow is Enuf,' is different from 'For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide.' Speaker 2: Well one of them is, is, is hope in the future, and one of them is despair in the end. And so they're, they're connected but they're opposite. Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it's the most popular title that's the least understood of any play that's (unclear). Speaker 2: (Laughter). Speaker 1: 'Cause everybody--they can give you the title but they can't tell you well what is she saying here. I mean they know what's the play, but the title I think--yeah. So-- Speaker 2: Well it can have--it was a very natural phenomenon. I was an undiagnosed bipolar. And so I would have these massive depressions with no medication. And, and very minimal therapy. And, and I--but I remained undiagnosed until I was thirty. So when I was twenty-three or twenty-two, I would have these massive depressions. And when I was in these depressions, I would have suicidal ideations. And I was in one of those massive depressions when I was driving to work one day. And I saw a double rainbow. And when I saw the double rainbow and I drove through it, the depression just disappeared. And so I said to myself that's the, that's the hope, that's the future. And I put it in the title because that's what happened to me. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So that--that's different from what I was told yesterday even. Story_ID: 659887 Speaker 1: Well, at what juncture did you decide, or did it kind of happen, that these poems are gonna be a theater piece and as such to-- Speaker 2: Well it--we had performed it as a theater piece in San Francisco [California] and it was listed as a best bet in the Bay Guardian [San Francisco Bay Guardian], which is the San Francisco equivalent of the Village Voice. And I decided if we were the best that San Francisco had to offer, it was time for us to leave and go to New York [New York]. So I wrote Sam Rivers and Bea Rivers who ran Studio Rivbea [New York, New York], who were hosting the alternative to Weinstein's [sic. George Wein] jazz con- jazz festival [Newport Jazz Festival]. And it was called the alternative jazz festival. And we wrote and asked them if we could do our choreopoem there because in the original 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] in San Francisco, I had two bands. I had a jazz trio and a Martiniquan band with sixteen pieces. And they played as part of the performance. And so I wrote the Rivers and told them what the show looked like. And I sent some photographs and they said, "Yes, you can have the space and be listed in the jazz program one night and you have two sets." And so I got to New York and I didn't know any musicians. But a musician I knew from Boston [Massachusetts] was in New York to play with somebody else, and his name was Bill Saxton. And so Bill Saxton became our musician for our debut of our version of 'For Colored Girls' straight out of San Francisco in New York. And Bernadine Jennings joined us as a dancer so Paula [Paula Moss] had someone to improvise with. And Lynette, what's Lynette's last name? Lynnette Morrow [ph.] I think, danced with us also at Studio Rivbea. And we studied with them at Clark Center in New York [Clark Center for the Performing Arts; Clark Center NYC, New York, New York] with, with Pepsi Bethel and Fred Benjamin and also with [HistoryMaker] Dianne McIntyre in the 125th Street and 1st Avenue, with Sounds in Motion. Speaker 1: Okay, same Diane McIntyre that went to Karamu House in Cleveland [Ohio], yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes. Story_ID: 659888 Speaker 1: And then I ran into my sister who--the playwright who always inspired me, Ifa. And Ifa said, "What you have here is theater Ntozake [HistoryMaker Ntozake Shange]. You don't need to do this in cafes anymore, you can do this in a theater." And I said, "Well, I'm happy doing it in cafes, I don't need to make it theater and do the same thing every night. When you do theater, you have to do the same poems every night. And doing what I do, I can change the poems every night. And we still have 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] because it becomes whatever poem I put in there." And she said, "No, no, no. You don't understand. Theater is alive. You can find actors who can make it different every night." And I very reluctantly entertained these actresses that my sister Ifa Bayeza, and [HistoryMaker] Oz Scott, my director, discovered in New York [New York]. And that's how we got Trazana Beverley and Laurie Carlos. And we kept Paula [Paula Moss] as a speaker as Lady in Green. And Paula had a verbal role which she had never had before. And I had two pieces that I did. We got Janet League and Rise Collins and Aku Kadogo and I think that's all there were. I don't think I'm leaving anybody out. And Oz arranged for us to perform--or I arranged for us to perform down the street from the Old Reliable [Old Reliable Theatre Tavern, New York, New York] where we had been working, where they had no running water and no heat And we were having practicing down there. And then Oz found us rehearsal space at New York University's theater school at the Tisch School of Art [Tisch School of the Arts, New York University, New York, New York]. And they had empty rehearsal rooms sometimes. So we would be in from seven to eleven [o'clock] or from seven to one, or from eleven 'til dawn. And then we would go to our day jobs and we would finish rehearsal. For free we did this. And then we did to DeMonte's Cafe [New York, New York] on 3rd Street and the Old Reliable was on 3rd Street between C [Avenue C] and D [Avenue D]. But DeMonte's was on 3rd Street between B [Avenue B] and C. So we were moving up as we went along, up the Lower East Side [New York, New York] (laughter). And we felt very accomplished because at DeMonte's, they not only served food, they served drinks. And, and people could come and sit down. So my parents [Eloise Owens Williams and Paul T. Williams] in their mink coats came to the Lower East Side to DeMonte's Cafe to see my show that my sister was very involved with as a dramaturge and assistant director. And she also did the set, the original flower that Ming Cho Lee won a Tony [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] for. And we performed it and Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.] came to DeMonte's to see it and said that we could do it at Henry Street. So we were very excited about that because we had a theater engagement, and I had been convinced that it was okay to let other people read my poems because I was so used to reading them all myself, that it was very hard for me to let other people have them. Even though I saw they brought different life to them. I still had to transition from ownership to sharing. And so we performed for Woodie King at Henry Street, and there were lines that went around the corner. And it was just word of mouth that people were coming to see it with. And we did a, a workshop of 'For Colored Girls' at Henry Street. And a lot of stuff we did at Henry Street, we lost when we went to The Public Theater [New York, New York]. We had to do a, an audition performance for Joseph Papp in the little theater where the movie theater is now at The Public. It used to be a rehearsal room and, and, and small theater. And we performed in there. And Joe picked us up. He picked up the show. But we made a lot of changes. Speaker 2: Okay. Let me just--we have to stop here, but just wanted to point out the Henry Street you were referring to is the New Federal Theatre [New York, New York]. Speaker 1: Yes. Speaker 2: Woodie King's New Federal Theatre (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: --and the Henry Street Settlement House [Henry Street Settlement, New York, New York]. Speaker 1: But we didn't do the New Federal, we did the Henry Street auditorium. Story_ID: 659889 Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please? Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange, N-T-O-Z-A-K-E, last name, S-H-A-N-G-E. Speaker 1: All right. And what is your date of birth and place of birth? Speaker 2: Ten, eighteen, forty-eight [October 18, 1948], Trenton, New Jersey. Speaker 1: And what is your occupation? Speaker 2: I'm a writer and professor and performer. Speaker 1: All right. Now and we--what is today's date? Speaker 2: February 1st, 2017. Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time? Speaker 2: In Washington, D.C. Story_ID: 659890 Speaker 1: We are finishing an interview that we began back in, I think in September, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Right. So we left off, we were talking about the reception for 'For Colored Girls Who Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow was Enuf' [sic. 'For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange]. And we were talking about various forums around the country, the reactions. And-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --you--I think you were addressing the fact that a lot of males have this reaction to it. Black males (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was awful. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: It made one of the most wonderful things in my life become really arduous and painful. But I think I made a mistake because I decided that the work would survive because it was powerful enough, so I didn't take on, I didn't write a defense of myself or of the work and I didn't take on my critics. And I think that was the mistake. And if I had to do it again, I would have addressed them directly. Speaker 1: Yeah. There were like forums held and we were discussing one in Chicago [Illinois] where a brother was almost thrown out a window. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Which, that's another long story (laughter) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it made them crazy. Clayton Riley, who lost his mind almost, and I had admired him immensely as a writer and he just turned against me. Speaker 1: Now you'd written that [HistoryMaker] Stanley Crouch will probably never reconcile himself with it. And-- Speaker 2: No, I don't think so (laughter). Speaker 1: Right (laughter). Speaker 2: But he's good friends with my sister [Ifa Bayeza]. Speaker 1: But [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti on the other hand-- Speaker 2: Haki Madhubuti did, he, he evolved. And at first he really didn't like my work and over a thirty year period he came to understand it and me better, and actually gave me an OBAC award [Organization of Black American Culture]-- Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: --in Chicago [Illinois]. Speaker 1: Right, I think you got the Gwendolyn Brooks Award (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: Yes, right. At the writers conference [National Black Writers Conference]. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: So since then, I mean the choreopoem has been performed all over the world. Speaker 2: Right, and we just now got a production going in Madrid [Spain] in Spanish that we're hopefully gonna bring to the United States to the Minor Latham theater [Minor Latham Playhouse] at Barnard College [New York, New York]. It's a total Spanish translation. It's gonna be performed in Madrid in March on International Women's Day. So I'm very tickled. Speaker 1: Yeah and I read also that the work resounds with women all over the world. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: And they don't have to be black. Speaker 2: No, not at all. We did a production in Appalachia with all white women and they didn't have to change the text at all. Speaker 1: No. They did it in Brazil, other places. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And why do you think it resounds all over the world and it's not just a-- Speaker 2: Because women are an oppressed people all over the world. And that's why that, that poor child Malala [Malala Yousafzai] was shot for trying to learn how to read and write and do numbers. And so she won a Nobel Prize [Nobel Peace Prize]. But she's only one of millions of girls who are denied the right to a full and vital intellectual life, or a free sexual life, or a free life at all. Women in Saudi Arabia still can't drive. Speaker 1: Yes, is there are--when these matters are discussed and I've been frustrated myself. The people that raise religion as the excuse for some of this treatment. Speaker 2: Well that was when men took over religion. Religion--Islam and, and Judeo Christian traditions were originally mother and harvest celebrations and they were taken over by, by the patriarchy and made into men. But the original impetus had been to celebrate fertility and birth, which are female activities. Speaker 1: I don't, you know but you know they, you know it's always used as a reason, you know, and-- Speaker 2: Right. But those were things that were added to the religions, they weren't in the text itself. Speaker 1: That's right. Speaker 2: Muhammad never said that women had to be covered or had to wear hijabs. That was something that male progenitors introduced. Speaker 1: Yeah Christians have a similar-- Speaker 2: Right. Well witches were burned. The witches they burned were mostly women who spoke out. Speaker 1: So, so at any rate, at, at, at the time though, this was upsetting, all this negative feedback from black men (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was very--it made me distraught because I love the black people and I couldn't believe they thought I was trying to harm us. Speaker 1: Right. Were you tempted to try to write something to, I don't know, some pro black man piece or something that you to counter it? Speaker 2: No I wasn't. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Because my focus was on women and I, I kept my focus. Speaker 1: And I think you pointed out in the introduction of this new latest edition of 'For Colored Girls' that there are, there are so many works in popular culture that are so much more demeaning to black men and women than-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --anything in 'Colored Girls.' Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And you're, I think you're right. Story_ID: 659891 Speaker 1: The play, you know, went from Henry Street Settlement House [Henry Street Settlement, New York, New York], Woodie King's [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.] theater, in '76 [1976] to Broadway in a matter of months. Speaker 2: Well it went from DeMonte's Cafe [New York, New York] to Henry Street Settlement House, and then it went to The Public Theater [New York, New York]. And from The Public Theater it went to Booth [Booth Theatre, New York, New York]. And that whole process took about a year. Speaker 1: Okay, so it's moving rapidly-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --through. And in '77 [1977] the poems are published in a book by Macmillan [Macmillan Publishing Company]. Speaker 2: Right. And I've had the same editor for forty years. My editor of that edition is still my editor. Speaker 1: Okay. And there's been a Bantam Books edition, Literary Guild edition [Literary Guild of America], and in '82 [1982] 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] was adapted for television by WNET [WNET-TV, New York, New York] as part of the 'American Playhouse' series-- Speaker 2: Right, I wrote that version. Speaker 1: Did you-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Did you like that? Okay. Speaker 2: Yeah, I wrote that and I like it better than what Tyler Perry bastardized. Speaker 1: Did you--now in the, in this, this--did you have to do very much to adapt it for television? Speaker 2: No. I had to create scenes where there were men present and in 'For Colored Girls' on stage, there were no men present. So I had to write new lines and I had to account for the male presence. And I had to account for their reactions to what the women were saying, and that was an adventure. Speaker 1: Okay. Are there any stories from that exercise? Speaker 2: No stories that I remember. It went very smoothly. And it was all very pleasant. We used women from the L.A. cast and the New York [New York] cast, and we auditioned men from New York and Los Angeles [California]. And we filmed in Miami [Florida]. Speaker 1: Okay. Now recently one of the cast members passed away. Speaker 2: Laurie Carlos passed away. Her memorial is February 4th, 2017, that's this Saturday. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. She played the Woman in Blue [sic. Lady in Blue]. Speaker 2: Yes, she played the Woman in Blue. She did the poem about being a black Puerto Rican, the poem about why shouldn't we just go ahead and be white then ["No More Love Poems #3"]. And she did Harlem ["I Used to Live in the World"], the piece about the subways. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And the piece on--the 'American Playhouse' edition was directed by-- Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Oz Scott, the same guy who directed the Broadway show. Speaker 1: Yeah, we interviewed Oz Scott about ten years ago. Speaker 2: Uh-huh. Speaker 1: Yeah, he had an interesting story. So, and you've had a really a positive relationship with him. Speaker 2: I still talk to him. I call him and read him what I thought was one of my best poems that I've written recently. And he, he, he had a really good critical response to it. And I was very honored and tickled because I hadn't shared a poem with him in a long time. Story_ID: 659892 Speaker 1: Now in 2009 [sic. 2010], this is some like thirty years later, Tyler Perry decides to produce-- Speaker 2: (Makes sound). Speaker 1: --a film version of it. And what's your critique of that version (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it's not my show. He tore my show apart and added some kind of bizarre rendition of Christianity and put it in there. He invented a character who didn't exist, the Woman in White [sic. Lady in White], who [HistoryMaker] Whoopi Goldberg played. And he made the rape scene just bizarre. And, and so the woman couldn't accomplish what the poem accomplishes, which is to reaffirm her strength at the end of the rape scene. And in Tyler's--in, in whatever his name is, in his version, she was defeated and, and, and, and shamed. And in my version we get rid of the shame; we don't accept it. Speaker 1: What--did he discuss his changes (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, we had many discussions, but he never took any notes. I don't think he paid any attention to anything I said. And I'm not sure he had any idea of who the references in the poems were to. And that makes a big difference when you're doing poetry. You have to know why you're saying every word and what every word means. And I'm sure he didn't go over the script like that. Speaker 1: For instance, can you give us a for instance? Speaker 2: Well let me see. Well yeah, the poem, the, the, "Love Poem #2" ["No More Love Poems #2"] where she says, "Even Charlie Mingus wanted to be a pimp." It refers to Charlie Mingus [Charles Mingus] as both the underdog where he says he wanted to be a pimp, and only if you had read it or knew Charlie Mingus' music, would you understand that line. And I'm sure Tyler Perry didn't go look for any of Mingus' music or the big band, or read the book. Which is, which is, to me, incompetent work. Speaker 1: Okay. And so did you have any, any official say so over the final version? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay. So-- Speaker 2: I had no, no, no, no control over anything. Speaker 1: Okay, so contractually you, you gave him the rights to-- Speaker 2: Contractually, I was a consultant. But he didn't pay any attention to it. Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I, I know-- Speaker 2: I mean they paid me, but they paid me for, for the rights to the work. And then I was supposed to be able to advise Mr. Perry as to what the context of the work should be and what the characters should be doing, which I tried to do. I tried very hard to do that. But he didn't pay any attention to what I said. Speaker 1: What do you think his motivation for wanting to do 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange]? If he was (unclear) (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, what I had heard was he wanted to do a serious play and get away from doing whatever he calls what he does. Speaker 1: Okay. His work is really popular. Speaker 2: Yes it is. Speaker 1: It, it connects to the black church audience and that sort of thing (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and there's millions of 'em. Speaker 1: Yes. And you know as a popular culture, references, you know, to the Big Mama stereotype. Speaker 2: Yes. Well one of the things I put in my contract was that Mother Dear couldn't appear in any of my shows. And they did keep that. But they put that weird character that Whoopi Goldberg played in there instead. Speaker 1: Okay. You think he would have inserted Madea-- Speaker 2: I think so because they heard that I had asked for her not to be in it and I got scolded by the receptionist and told that Mother Dear was very popular with their audience and it was very bad for me to say that I didn't want her. Speaker 1: This is--yeah, so I can see why you, you, you know, were kind of upset with the final product. So have there been--so does he own the rights to that name or anything? I mean now. I mean can-- Speaker 2: No, he-- Speaker 1: Can someone else produce a-- Speaker 2: They can pro- they can use the title. You can't copyright a title. But I was disturbed because in the--in a later edition of 'For Colored Girls,' I saw on the cover, "Tyler Perry's 'For Colored Girls,'" and then it had my whole title and my name. But that infuriated me, but there is nothing I could do about it because they did it because he's so popular. Story_ID: 659893 Speaker 1: I just wanna point out that the, that the original play won an OBIE Award [Off-Broadway Theater Awards], the Theatre World Award, the Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], the Drama Desk Award, the Theatre World Award, and-- Speaker 2: And AUDELCO [Audience Development Committee, Inc.]. Speaker 1: Yeah, AUDELCO award, you got the Drama Desk, Tony Award for Best Play. Speaker 2: The Outer Critics Circle [Outer Critics Circle Award], the Apple Award [Golden Apple Award] from New York magazine [sic.]. Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, so it was, you know, successful (laughter). Speaker 2: Yes, it was roundly successful despite what all the black men were saying. Speaker 1: Right, right. And did--were there any, were there any black male critics that, that seemed to have a--I mean to get it? Speaker 2: Not at that time. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: Later on there were, but not at that time. Speaker 1: Yeah, like you said, Haki [HistoryMaker Haki Madhubuti] came around and said he-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --he did, but I--yeah. All right so, well how long did this--did the 'Colored Girls' project ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] occupy your time? Did you write while--were you still writing while this was going on (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was writing other things, yes. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Speaker 2: I wrote 'Photographs' ['A Photograph: A Study of Cruelty' and 'A Photograph: Lovers in Motion'] and 'Spell #7.' And I did the adaptation of 'Mother Courage' ['Mother Courage and Her Children,' Bertolt Brecht]. And let's see, a piece called 'Boogie Woogie Landscapes.' Another piece called--what is that thing called? 'Disasters and Other Festive Occasions' ['Natural Disasters and Other Festive Occasions']. And let's see, 'Ridin' the Moon in Texas' ['Ridin' the Moon in Texas: Word Paintings']. I did--and 'Where the Mississippi Meets the Amazon' with Thulani Davis and Jessica Hagedorn. And I had a band with John Purcell and Jean-Paul Bourelly called Syllable. And I worked with a number of really fine musicians like Russell Sadiq [ph.], Malachi Favors, Don (Unclear) [ph.], Chico Freeman, David Murray, Fred Hopkins and Steve McCall. A number of musicians that, that we know. Now as, as, as, as creators of new phases of what we used to call new black music or classical black music. Speaker 1: That's right, that's right. And those all that you named are (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. Speaker 1: --were on the cutting edge-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and still are, you know, those that are still around. Story_ID: 659894 Speaker 1: --Mostly poems, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Mostly. And you're, you're primarily a poet. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah, and 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] as a choreopoem, was a collection of poems that were (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, it was twenty poems. Speaker 1: --organized in a dramatic fashion. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Yeah. So, what's your favorite, what's your favorite work of your poetic works (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My favorite work is always a new one. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And I have a new book coming out in November that's a bilingual edition of new and selected poems. So it has poems for over the last twenty-five years as well as poems from over the last year, which is really exciting to me because since I got sick with the neuropathy and the stroke, I hadn't really written anything in ten years. And then last year I was able to use my fingers for the first time and I wrote all these poems. And so they're in the new book. And the new book is called 'Wild Beauty' ['Wild Beauty: New and Selected Poems,' Ntozake Shange]. Speaker 1: When did you have your first stroke? Speaker 2: In 2004. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So it's been--and then there was a succession of them right? Speaker 2: Yes, and then I got neuropathy in, in 2011-- Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: --which made me unable to use my hands and my, and my legs. Speaker 1: Did you wr- did you continue to write during that period? Speaker 2: I couldn't. I had to concentrate on my rehabilitation 'cause I had to learn how to walk again and how to stand up. I had to learn how to get out of my bed and into a wheelchair. I was really incapacitated. I couldn't sit up without help. I had to learn how to chew food again and how to hold a fork. So I concentrated on that. I was not concentrating on writing anything. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. And I--when you were younger, in fact the title of the, of 'Colored Girls' alludes to the fact that you contemplated suicide at one point. Has having these strokes and having to struggle like this given you a different appreciation for-- Speaker 2: Right. Well-- Speaker 1: --life? Speaker 2: --it turned out that I'm bipolar and was an undiagnosed bipolar person. So my experiences of depression were so intense that led me to contemplate suicide. But now with medications and intense therapy and my illnesses, I've been able to see--to be more optimistic and hopeful because when I was young I was bereft of hope and, so I had nothing to work toward, nothing to believe in that was gonna save me. And so when I--without being diagnosed, I, I introduced myself to a number of religions of third world people like Santeria and Buddhism and Hinduism. I was looking for something to believe in and it just took me a long time because I could intellectually do it, because in 'For Colored Girls' I know what hope is; I can write that. But I couldn't keep it alive in myself. Story_ID: 659895 Speaker 1: So many artists, I know, I'm looking at a website once--I've had several close friends who are bipolar, and I was looking at a website on all the artists in the world. Everybody from I don't know, I mean there's so many, there's composers-- Speaker 2: A lot of us are bipolar (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) jazz musicians, every kind of--especially artists-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --and some scientists too are bipolar. There's just a list, a cavalcade of great people that have bipolar disorder. Speaker 2: Well when you're hyper you're really brilliant (laughter). Being hyper leads to all kinds of relations. The problem is when you come out of being hyper, you go into the depths of depression-- Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: --that seems like it never ends. Speaker 1: Yeah, it would seem that--I mean at the time that you were considering suicide, here you were, outwardly people would see a beautiful young woman with talent, brilliant mind, you know, privileged enough to go to Barnard College [New York, New York], to be raised in a family of doctors and have these celebrity guests. All the greatest minds in the world were coming to the house. I mean they were seeing you as--see you as extremely lucky. Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A lot to live for. Speaker 2: Well I, I did see myself as extremely lucky. But it also seemed ephemeral. Speaker 1: Okay. But the--so the understanding of bipolar disorder has changed since you-- Speaker 2: Right, and there are medications that are specifically for bipolar people. When I was first diagnosed, the medicines we got were really antipsychotic medicines. Like I had to take Stelazine and Artane and Thorazine and lithium. All these very serious drugs that, that were debilitating. And essentially all they did was numb you to the, to the, to the mood swings. But there's no attempt to deal with the issues that came up during the mood swings. And now treatment is totally different. Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard people who are taking medications say that it can be like, even now depends on what you're taking and what the diagnosis is. 'Cause they don't always get it exactly right either. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: You could be taking something that makes--one young lady I know is--she's, she's a singer. She feels, she says that she--when she's taking the medication she feels like she's wearing a lid over-- Speaker 2: Right, it can do that. You can get medicine like that. Speaker 1: That's not-- Speaker 2: I used to take 'em, I know. But I don't take, I don't have those anymore. I have a very enlightened therapist and psychiatrist. I am very lucky. Speaker 1: So has the medication impaired your creativity at all? Speaker 2: Not at all. It, it, it allows me to be creative without being hyper. Or I get--when I do get hyper, I'm able to say okay you're hyper, it might go away. Story_ID: 659896 Speaker 1: Let me ask you, I don't think I asked you the last time about this. And if I did, it won't hurt to ask it again. What is your process of creativity? 'Cause you've come up with some beautiful passages. And what's your process? Speaker 2: Well I--there's several things that are, that are very different. Like when I--after I hadn't written anything for ten years and I couldn't use my fingers, I had a poem, I could hear this poem going on in my head. And it was so powerful I didn't want--and it was so beautiful. And I could hear how beautiful it was. But I didn't know how to capture it, how to keep it 'cause my hands were so weird. So I tried to write it by hand and it hurt my fingers, so I had to stop that. Then I tried to do it on my, my iPad, and my fingers would slip off the keys and so it would be a mess, and I couldn't do that. And I had a computer, but I said to myself I, you know I can't use the computer but I'm gonna have to try it because I can't get this poem out any other way. I have to try and write it down. So I went to the computer and for the first time in ten years I had use of my fingers. It took me a long time and it looked pretty funny because I made a lot of mistakes, but I wrote the poem down, I saved it so that my assistant was able to come over and type it nicely for me. And I was able to have this poem. It appears in the new book ['Wild Beauty: New and Selected Poems,' Ntozake Shange]. So I'm very, very happy. So that's one way it kind of--it just comes in my head and won't go out. Another way I get it is that when I'm journaling, I might be just journaling about the day and all of a sudden a poem will start coming out in the journal. And I'll just go with it and see what happens. And if it looks like a poem when I'm finished, I'll take it out of the journal and type it. So that's one way. And the way I approach writing plays and novels is very different because then I set aside blocks of time to write so that I don't lose track of the characters or the moods in certain scenes in a novel so I have continuity. The same thing applies to plays where I set out blocks of time to write and I write deliberately. I don't wait for a hyper instant--or for my brain to be taken over with a scene or with dialogue. I write deliberately and with discipline. Speaker 1: Okay, so say you're writing a play and do you like have an idea of what you wanna write before you start writing it? I mean you have an idea of where you want it to go (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have an idea of what a scene should be. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: Now how to get that to happen is the gift I have. But I--when I'm writing a play, I'm aiming for a certain conclusion of that scene. I know that--I know a feeling is supposed to come at the end of the scene and my job is to write well enough to have that feeling come. Speaker 1: Do you know the end of a play before you start writing it? Speaker 2: Not always. Speaker 1: Okay. And do your characters--I know August Wilson said this and the lady who was just here, Miss Billingsley [HistoryMaker ReShonda Tate Billingsley], who's a novelist was saying the same thing, that her characters talk to her. And they tell her what's gonna happen (laughter). Speaker 2: Right, right. Speaker 1: Do you have the same feeling? Speaker 2: Well, my characters creep up on me and I feel what they're feeling. I don't hear their words until I write them down. But I'm in the mood that they're in, in a certain scene. Story_ID: 659897 Speaker 1: Have you written any plays lately? I mean as such-- Speaker 2: I'm working on one now. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what's it about? You--can you tell us? Speaker 2: Well yeah I know what it's, it's about relationships and power in relationships. And abuse in relationships that are very different. Like one of them is psychologically abused. Another girl is pregnant, three months pregnant and her boyfriend is a Dominican construction work- owner, he owns this construction company. So he has all these trucks and things on the property. And he wants desperately to get married so the baby will be legitimate because he's a, a, he, he's a, he's an intense Catholic even though he's been having premarital sex. And when she won't convert to Catholicism or agree to have the baby christened as a Catholic, he sort of loses his mind and tries to run over her with one of his trucks. And one of the other girls in this show is married to a white man who doesn't like that she hangs around multicultural people. And he ends up killing her because she won't let go of these black and Latin friends she has. And, and so the, the, the abuse is different for every character, and every character has a different way of, of dealing with it and, or trying to free herself of it. And there's a third, a fourth character who's not associated with any man in particular, who is sexually active, has a vivid night life and she's very free flowing. And all of the male characters try to keep her away from the women that they're abusing because she disrupts the women's submission. She's an example of what you can do when you're not being told that you're nothing and you're powerless. So she's in the show as well. Story_ID: 659898 Speaker 1: You actually have a, a number of plays that I don't know if everybody's aware of, you know (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. Speaker 1: I mean they're--you know, people talk about 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] so much, but 'Mother Courage and Her Children' [Bertolt Brecht] won an OBIE Award [Off-Broadway Theater Awards] in '81 [1981]. There's--I'm looking at a list of fifteen plays. Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean this is a lot of production and you're working on one now. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And the last one I have on this list is 'Whitewash' [Ntozake Shange], written in 1994. Speaker 2: Right, that was a video for children. That was nominated for a CableACE Award. Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. So how long does it typically take you to write a play? Speaker 2: It takes me a long time (laughter) because it's not a form that I'm accustomed to. So I have to struggle with the form as well as with the text because I have to remember to stop and put the person's name in caps and then write the text, and then take the margin over and put the name in caps, and then take the text over. It's, it's just, it is just really arduous for me. And I, and I, and it interferes with the flow of the stuff until I get really accustomed to the computer and the margins and moving things around. But it takes me about an hour every time I start to get in the flow of the, of the form. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Poetry's a lot easier, you know, yeah (simultaneous). Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely. Story_ID: 659899 Speaker 1: You've written several novels as well, 'Sassafrass, Cypress and Indigo' [Ntozake Shange]-- Speaker 2: Um-hm. Speaker 1: --'Betsey Brown' [Ntozake Shange] in '82 [sic. 1985]. Speaker 2: 'Sassafrass, Cypress and Indigo' was nominated for the PEN, the PEN/Faulkner Award [PEN/Faulkner Award for Fiction]. There were three novels nominated and it was, it was one of the ones that didn't get it. But there were only three first novels nominated. So I was very, very proud. That was one of my proudest moments. Speaker 1: Now what's 'Sassafrass, Cypress and Indigo' about? Speaker 2: It's about three daughters of a weaver who--and the family's been weaving for these people since slavery times. And the three daughters all know how to weave and the mother [Hilda Effania] taught them how to weave. But they're interested in, in different things. Cypress is a dancer who went away to private school that Ms. Fitzroy [ph.] sent her to. That's the white woman who owns, who used to own them. And Sassafrass is a weaver, or a fabric artist you would call her now, who does that for her living and for her craft. And Indigo plays the violin wildly and joined a group of boys called the Geechee Captains [Jr. Geechee Captains], and they discover a group of people called the slaves who are ourselves [sic. the slaves who were ourselves]. And the slaves who are ourselves guide the Geechee Captains through their caverns underneath Charleston [South Carolina] where the slaves used to have to travel to get to the slave market and be sold. And they find these caverns and they, they play these remarkable adolescent games and scenes. And, and find some strength and relics of blackness with the slaves who are ourselves. And all the girls have different relationships with men, and they have different relationships with their arts. And they have visits from, from different women who were important in their field. And they have lovers who introduce us to different kinds of relationships the girls can have. And they're all very peculiar and, and, and, and comical in a way. [HistoryMaker] Stanley Crouch did say about 'Sassafrass' that I had a, a gift for humor (laughter). So he found something that he liked about my work. And they're delightful--and people keep telling me they named their daughter after Indigo because Indigo--the novel starts out with something about, there's a woman with a moon in her mouth, and where there is a woman, there was magic. And the woman that we're talking about is Indigo. And there are--there is a plethora of Indigos running around. Some of them are biracial and some of them are black and some of them are Latin and some of them are Asian, but they're all named Indigo because Indigo is the one, the most magical of the three daughters. Story_ID: 659900 Speaker 1: We mentioned [HistoryMaker] Stanley Crouch again, is there a particular black critic or critics that you think are more important? I mean, you know, that--whose, whose opinion you really value (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well C.L.R. James I used to take very seriously and I was very honored when he wrote in--a review of 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange]. And I got to know him later on when he was living in Brixton with Darcus Howe and Leila Hassan. And there was a C.L.R. James Institute that Darcus started. And I used to go over to Brixton once or twice a year to participate in the programs they had that were international seminars or festivals with black artists in honor of C.L.R. Speaker 1: Yeah, Brixton is a neighborhood in London [England] where there are a lot of West Indians and-- Speaker 2: Right, and Africans. Speaker 1: Yeah, and Africans and Headstart bookstore [Headstart Books and Crafts, London, England]. Speaker 2: And, and working class white people are still there. Speaker 1: Yeah. Speaker 2: And one of the mosques that they always surveil in London is right in the middle of Brixton. And in order to go to my friend's house, I had to pass it every day. And it's the mosque where they, they suspect that a lot of the Bost- not the Boston, the London terrorists meet and, and, and, and, and form plots and things. And we, but we don't know that. It's just something the London police believe. Speaker 1: Okay. But are you familiar with Operation Headstart [sic.]? The bookstore (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a bookstore there by that name. Speaker 2: Oh, I know the bookstore there, I go to the bookstore. But I didn't know what it was named. Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, a fella named (unclear)-- Speaker 2: Yeah, but I go there every time I go to London to buy books. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Yeah, it's a huge operation. Speaker 2: It's near the market. Speaker 1: So C.L.R. James, who else of the critics? Was your work reviewed by Houston Baker [Houston A. Baker, Jr.] or-- Speaker 2: I don't know. Clarence Major was wonderful one, and June Jordan. Who else? Lorenzo Thomas when he was alive. And let's see who else? I don't remember any other ones. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. I just wondered, you know, because you know the relationship between the artist and the critic sometimes can be important, depending on--it's not just those that knock your work, but those who-- Speaker 2: Right, but you can learn from them. Speaker 1: Right. Speaker 2: Well Diane Wakoski wrote a beautiful review of 'Betsey Brown' [Ntozake Shange]. And who else? Alta [Alta Gerrey], [HistoryMaker] Ishmael Reed writes, writes reviews about me that, that are interesting. Sometimes they're critical and sometimes they're not. And that's about it. Story_ID: 659901 Speaker 1: 'Betsey Brown' [Ntozake Shange] came out in '85 [1985], and you say that was--now what was that one about? That-- Speaker 2: That was about my early childhood in St. Louis [Missouri]. Well not quite early, it was about adolescence in St. Louis. And it was during a time when St. Louis was being integrated. So the--all of the tensions that young black children experienced trying to integrate white schools in the '50s [1950s] is in there, and Betsey's [Betsey Brown] trying to negotiate her way through discovering boys at the same time she's trying to negotiate establishing herself in a white school as the only black student. And she has two sisters [Sharon Brown and Margot Brown] and a brother [Allard Brown] and there's relationships with them and the mother and father. And there is a series of housekeepers who come to take care of them because the mother works. And the housekeepers all bring different elements of the South with them. So the girls, the whole family is influenced by women from Arkansas and Mississippi who come straight up the Mississippi River to St. Louis, to the big city to work, or to go to school. And there's one, there's one who's studying to be an opera singer, but who has nose bleeds all the time and can't work 'cause she--she has nose bleeds 'cause she sleeps on the third floor and every time she goes up there, she gets a nose bleed. So she has to go. And so they lose her. And there's another one named Carrie who sort of takes over the house and becomes a really powerful figure and gets the children to realize that they can do things they never thought they could do. Like they can keep the house clean, and they can fold clothes and iron, and they can help take care of the garden. And Carrie also has relationship with Jeff the gardener who takes care of all the black people's lawns on this street. And she and the gardener have a romance. And the children are, are fascinated by this romance that Carrie has because Carrie is not your version of an ideal woman. She wears two dresses at a time and ties their waist with a piece of rope. And she has big dangling earrings, but they're at different places on her ears. And she has a head wrap she wears sometimes, and other times she just wears her hair sort of sticking all out. But Mr. Jeff seems to like her and the kids seem to like her. And the only one who had a problem with her is the mother. But the mother leaves to go resuscitate herself from her relationship with her husband, and Carrie takes over the house. And the girls have a different response to their mother leaving. Betsey contemplates running away. The other ones just act up and don't do right. The father tries to be as helpful as he can, but he's sort of helpless with the girls. He tries to fix their hair and they look a mess. And they don't--and he doesn't know how to iron their clothes. So Carrie shows them how to iron their clothes, so the father isn't burning up everything all the time. And it's just a very interesting story about a black middle class family in the '50s [1950s]. Speaker 1: It suggests, I mean this and I guess other things I heard you discuss suggests that we, we may have left something behind in the South. That we, that we need in the North. Is that, is that--you think-- Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And like Representative Clyburn [HistoryMaker James Clyburn] was saying most of the black people in the United States still live in the South, and we're still a very rural people. And that's what he wants the infrastructure to reflect the needs of the rural black people and concentrate on water and sewage and broadband connections for computers so that these people aren't left out of the 21st century. And there are black people who are rural and the only people who get the attention are urban black people and we have to come, come to terms with the fact that the bulk of us still live in the South and we still live in the rural communities. Story_ID: 659902 Speaker 1: We have the 'Black Book' [Robert Mapplethorpe], 'Liliane' ['Liliane: Resurrection of the Daughter,' Ntozake Shange] and 'Some Sing, Some Cry' [Ntozake Shange]-- Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous). Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I think that's the latest novel right? Speaker 2: Um-hm. My sister and I wrote that. Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's Ifa Bayeza. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: And well any comments about those? Speaker 2: Well 'Liliane' was one of my most adventurous books. She's one of my most interesting characters. She's a painter, she travels around the world with letters of credit and her paints and ben wa balls. And she attracts lovers from different continents and has different artistic experiences with all of them. And she's--it's a very sensual book. And one of the main characters who, who narrates a lot of it, is a black Puerto Rican named Victor-Jesus Maria, and he's a photographer. So he's always capturing Lili [Liliane] in these poses and she becomes so easy around him that she doesn't notice when he's taking pictures, or if she looks pretty or not, or what she's wearing. He just takes photographs of her and tells us what it is she's up to. And she has other lovers while Victor-Jesus is in the background documenting it. And she has a white boyfriend name Zoom who rides a motorcycle. And they have--she has a--she does performance art. And so she had Zoom and Victor-Jesus and somebody else, some other fella, digging graves for Native Americans on the side of the Pacific Highway (laughter). And when the police comes, she explained to them that she's digging graves for the Native Americans who have been left there without any ceremony. And the police tell her, "Well, you can't dig up public property." And she said, "It's not public property. It's Native American property." And so they have these scenes where she sets up artistic adventures that let them have different interactions with the, with the social fabric around them. Story_ID: 659903 Speaker 1: The latest one is 'Some Sing, Some Cry' [Ntozake Shange]. Speaker 2: Right-- Speaker 1: Twenty ten [2010] (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) that's the, that's the history of black women in music in America. And it starts (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now that was--was that difficult to write? When--'cause you-- Speaker 2: It was very difficult because we-- Speaker 1: --you already experienced some strokes, right? Speaker 2: Right. Well, this is before the strokes. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: We--my sister [Ifa Bayeza] and I write differently. So it was hard for us to manage to get the, the chapters in sync with each other. We at least had a general outline of--that was chronological that went from slavery times until about 1980. We tried to cover all the different kinds of music that black women were important in. And we had one family that produced all these singers. And they, they, they go through the major social events and--of, of their times, like World War I [WWI] and the Trail of Tears and World War II [WWII] and the fires and the big black bands like, that came out of that when they working in the [U.S.] Army, a segregated Army. And then she had, they have rhythm and blues, when there were black companies that produced black records. And they had a blues singer who was equivalent to a Bessie Smith. And then they--later on they had like a Dinah Washington. And they produced an opera singer. And there was somebody who sounded like Etta James and another one who sounded like Chaka Khan. And then there's a rapper who comes along. And in the meantime they deal with drugs, with physical abuse. They deal with different relationships with different men who play different instruments. And all of this takes place in that novel. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So this is almost like--the family, as it sings, kind of goes through the various stages of history, historical and, and musical styles-- Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: --too. Story_ID: 659904 Speaker 1: Now you've written children's books-- Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: --too. You wrote a book about Coretta Scott [Coretta Scott King], that's--I think that's the latest one right? Speaker 2: No, no. Speaker 1: No. Speaker 2: The latest one would be 'Whitewash' [Ntozake Shange]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right. Speaker 2: No, there's two other ones, but I forget their names because they told me later what they named them. But there, there are two, two books of poems for eight to twelve year olds that were, that the poems were then to drawings by a painter whose name I have unfortunately at this point forgotten. But those were the last two. Speaker 1: Okay. The books are 'Whitewash,' 'Coretta Scott' [Ntozake Shange], 'Ellington Was Not a Street' [Ntozake Shange], 'Float Like a Butterfly: Muhammad Ali' [sic. 'Muhammad Ali: The Man Who Could Float Like a Butterfly and Sting Like a Bee,' Ntozake Shange]. Speaker 2: That's gonna be reissued because it's about Muhammad Ali. Speaker 1: Right, and 'Daddy Says' [Ntozake Shange]. Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: So those are--did they, do they have mostly the same illustrator or-- Speaker 2: No, they're all different. Speaker 1: Different, okay, all right. Are these all black illustrators? Speaker 2: For the most part, except for Michael Sporn, who did 'Whitewash.' Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Now does it take long to write a children's book? Speaker 2: Takes as long as it does to write a book of poems. Speaker 1: Okay, and what considerations do you have to I guess make to you know, write a decent children's book? Speaker 2: To keep it, to keep it simple, to keep the sentences from being too complex. To make sure I don't talk down to the children, even though I'm trying to keep it simple for them. I don't want to keep it so simple that it talks down to them. So I involve them in adult thoughts as much as I can. So that it's almost like they're listening to somebody telling them a tale that they're overhearing at the kitchen table so that they understand, but it's new to them. Story_ID: 659905 Speaker 1: We touched on writing poems before, but the process of writing a poem is--when you were talking about it before but I don't know if we really finished that discussion. But, but you get an inspiration to write and you just start writing, right? Speaker 2: Well the poems float in my head. And--sometimes if I'm really lucky. And if they don't float in my head, I, I sit down with a piece of paper and a pencil or the computer and I just write what comes to my mind and see if there's anything there I can use. Usually there is, usually the first line will propel a second line and I'll find out what the poem is about by the second line and then I can continue to write it. Story_ID: 659906 Speaker 1: What makes a good poet? Speaker 2: What makes a good poet? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: Oh my god. The ability to listen and to hear the, the nuance of different people's voices and what their interests are, what are the interests or dreams of the, of, of, of an unknown person, or of a person you know. But to hear their voices and to hear their inner thoughts somehow. Like I used to love to write on the subway and, and look at people on the subway and write a poem about them based on their behavior and their dress and their physical movements. Or if they're talking, listening to what they're talking about and what their accents are. I used to love to write like that. I think I still do write like that, I just don't get around as much as I used to, 'cause I live in a different environment, I don't live in an urban environment anymore, and I really miss that because it used to really feed me. So now when I, when I'm writing, I draw on memory a lot. And I, I grasp at the moments I am in urban areas so that I don't lose the beauty of it. But I'm beginning to understand, my time in Florida led me to understand some of the nuance and bravado of southern black life. Because, and also some of the sorrow of it because I have two poems that are about Florida. One of them is about a lynching of, of five black people on one tree. Two men, one pregnant black woman and another black man who's on a lower limb. And they were all hung on the same tree. And on your way to Dixieland [sic. Winn Dixie Stores, Inc.], which is the market, the supermarket, on your way to Dixie, you pass this tree where these black people were hung. And there's no marker there that says five black people died here. So the refrain in that poem ['Live Oak,' Ntozake Shange] is there are no markers. It just goes on to, to, to try to see what these bodies must have looked like. All these dead black people hanging from this one tree that nobody cut down, that everybody knows where it is and will show you. But there's no marker there that the city put, or that black people put. Nobody marked it. They just record it with oral history. But to me it was very painful because I passed it every day on the way to the supermarket to buy some cigarettes. To do something very simple I had to go through a whole area of dead black people. Speaker 1: There's a project now out of--that [HistoryMaker] Bryan Stevenson has got underway. Are you familiar with that? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Out of Montgomery. He has a project to mark these sites-- Speaker 2: Oh wonderful. Speaker 1: --and he's actually doing this in Montgomery, Alabama. Speaker 2: Well I wish he'd come to Gainesville, Florida and I'll show him the tree. Speaker 1: Yeah, he's been on--he was on '60 Minutes' about two months ago. But he's, he's a young lawyer who's worked in restorative justice projects in Alabama, devote his life to doing that kind of thing in the South. So I mean there, there's a movement afoot to do something about it, but, but when, when you and I were being raised up, people didn't talk about it. Speaker 2: What was going on--it was talked about. In my house it was. Speaker 1: Well a lot of places (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Ida B. Wells was talked about in our house. And she led that lynching, the anti-lynching movement. So it was, it was a frequently talked about subject in my house because one of my uncles was lynched, Uncle Julius. Julius Owens [ph.] was his name. And he was lynched in South Carolina where my family's based from on my mother's [Eloise Owens Williams] side. And so it was part of our family history and it was never something that wasn't discussed. And we would see pictures of lynchings in Jet magazine. And so it was, it was--we did talk about it. Speaker 1: I know there was a time when the Chicago Defender had a picture of a lynching almost every--but this was like--is a while ago but I know--we're close to the same age, we're about a year apart. I remember in the community I grew up in it wasn't very, you know, intellectual community. People seemed to avoid discussing why they came north from the South, what happened down there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: Why their parents don't go back there. Speaker 2: Right. Speaker 1: All that sort of thing. I mean it's a--I hear what you're saying too, but I know I've seen--'cause you look at anybody goes to the library and looks at the old copies of the Afro [Afro American Newspapers] or the Defender, you'll see lynching pictures from every week, you know. Speaker 2: Right. Well that's what we used to talk about. Story_ID: 659907 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about teaching, we haven't talked about that yet. And you--you've been a teacher for a long time. Speaker 2: Yeah, I started teaching when I was in graduate school [at the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], I was a TA [teacher's assistant]. And I taught like an African American literature one class. The difference in my class from most African American lit one classes is mine did not start during the colonial period. Mine started with the first edition of, of 'Their Eyes Were Watching God' [Zora Neale Hurston]. Because that's the year that it was republished. So that's where I started. And from there we went backwards to Ann Petry and Alice Childress and writers like that. Rosa Guy, Louise Meriwether and, and, oh I'm losing--Paule Marshall. I went that way. I, I, I taught, and I taught a lot of women writers. I might have taught only the women writers I think. I might have. Although I remember vaguely teaching the 'Invisible Man' [Ralph Ellison] and 'Black Boy' [Richard Wright] and 'Native Son' [Richard Wright]. But I'm not sure what courses I taught them in. I know I taught 'Native Son' because I also taught Sam Delany [Samuel Ray Delany, Jr.] because I thought it was important for the students to know that there were black people who wrote science fiction. And there are elements in some of, some of, some of (unclear) Delany's work that parallel Richard Wright. Some of the characters in outer space suffered just like Bigger Thomas suffered. And I found that fascinating. And I wanted my students to see the co-relation of how you can depict oppression as a black person in many different ways and forms. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: I also taught a class that started with translations of the model of, of Aztec language love poems. And then moved to Mexican, contemporary Mexican poems. But we started with the translations of the original people and their love poems that had been found. Because I thought that was so wonderful because we always think of Aztecs as people who, who drank blood and burned skulls and made sacrifices. And here was this beautiful collection of Aztec love poems that stood right in the face, stood right in the face of all the mythology about Native American people. And so I thought that was important. I taught some slave narratives, but not a lot of them because they became redundant to me. And I didn't find them very interesting because I think the abolitionists guided them to the point where they became stock in trade. I ran away, I was beaten, I escaped, now I know the abolitionists and I can talk. Speaker 1: Too polemical in that sense. Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And I--and it was boring to me. So I skipped over that. I have a lot of respect for Skip Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] for sticking with it because I couldn't stick with it. Speaker 1: Did you teach Lucy Terry? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. She's, she's generally thought to be the first black woman poet. Speaker 2: Right, well I, you know I, I missed a lot of the early, of the 16th and 17th and 18th century black writers. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: 'Cause my emphasis has always been contemporary stuff. And I guess my work, my reading would be legitimately intense around reconstruction. Speaker 1: Okay. Now you've met some of the, some of the important writers of the last century, you know, as your own, right? Speaker 2: Yes. Speaker 1: Yeah. Were you able to, you know, use those, that familiarity to enrich your class? Speaker 2: Well not really. I was too young to remember very much of it. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: I just remembered their figures or how they treated me. But I was too young to understand what they might be talking about. Story_ID: 659908 Speaker 1: What would you advise young writers to do today? What would be your advice to young writers? Speaker 2: To read as much as possible. To read everything. To read Europeans, to read Africans, to read Latin Americans especially because they're Western Hemispheric like we are. And we need to begin to understand our hemisphere. Because there are black people in every part of Latin America. And in order to understand black people, we need to understand all of us, not just seeing the speakers. And so I would just suggest the most important thing is to read. I--my main complaint about new poets and new writers is they are so ignorant of what came before them, that they can't create anything new because they have no idea of what's been done already. So they, so they, they start and, and they start at the beginning almost when they don't have to do that. It's like reinventing the wheel. And I, and I find it very lacking. So when I find a poet who's obviously been exposed to other writers, I'm, I'm--I become ecstatic and I get very happy. And today I had a wonderful experience because on the ride in here, into town, I made a call to Miguel Algarin because I estimate calls to Miguel Algarin because he never answers his phone. So I'm always trying to call him when he might answer the phone and he answered today. And he wanted to know if I wanted to co-edit with him a new edition of Nuyorican poetry from the Nuyorican Cafe. And I said I would love to do that. And I'm, I'm very excited because there are a number of very strong female Puerto Rican and black poet, female poets working there. And I would love to be able to expose them to a broader audience. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Are there enough venues today for a proper kind of intergenerational transmission between the older writers and the younger ones? Speaker 2: Well that's what the Nuyorican Poets Cafe [New York, New York] was able to do. Our problem now is that a lot of us are starting to die. And so we have to try to involve as many elders as we can in the readings, but, but we've been very successful at that. And so I don't know any other places. There's a place sometimes in, in Hou- Houston--sometimes in Washington [D.C.], Busboys and Poets has readings. And there you can hear older poets and younger poets mingling together. And that's always nice. But it's not like when I was coming along as a young poet and there'd be five or six venues where you would see older poets and young poets, and elderly poets and young poets reading in the same cafe in the same night. A lot of those places don't exist anymore. There were so many for me to pick from that I could do a reading every night in San Francisco [California] at a different place. And I think that the rap movement, because it makes money, has made it more difficult for serious writers to find venues to work in because their work doesn't pay. People have to come and drink in order for the bar to make money. But it's not like if a rapper was there and it was crowded and full of people. And so I don't know if that's--what the correlation is exactly. But I do know that there are fewer venues for serious young writers to mingle with older writers. And I'm not sure the older writers would know where the younger writers were. Speaker 1: Well it seems like today it would be easier for a serious writer to find each other, or the audience to find a writer as well as the more complicating, cutting edge music and that sort of thing. Or, I don't know (simultaneous)-- Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If they had venues. There aren't any venues. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So the problem is there's no place for them to (unclear)-- Speaker 2: That's what I mean. Speaker 1: Okay. Story_ID: 659909 Speaker 1: Are you encouraged by any young writers? Are there any that you really respect? Speaker 2: Yeah, I am. I'm, I'm excited about the younger people in--there's a name for them. Cave Canem [Cave Canem Foundation, Brooklyn, New York], there's young, there's a group of young writers, they're not all young writers. Some of them are in their forties and fifties, and some are in their twenties, Cave Canem is a group that comes together, I think they come together twice a year and have ope- have readings with one another and critique one another. And then they have featured poets that they invite to read with them and talk with them. And that's a group that you can count on to be active and to be publishing in little magazines, and to be aware of one another so that they can invite one another to different universities and bookstores in different towns to introduce the writer to a new audience. So I'm inspired by them. Speaker 1: How do you spell their name? Speaker 2: Cave Canem, C-A-V-E, C-A-N-U-M [sic.], I think, I can't swear to that. If you call up one Hermine Pinson whose number I'm gonna give you, she's in it and she can, she can tell you more. And also spell it correctly (laughter). Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now among your contemporaries, who are your favorite poets? Speaker 2: Jessica Hagedorn and Thulani Davis. Mariposa, who's also known as Maria Fernandez [Maria Teresa Fernandez]. But she writes under the name Mariposa. A young Puerto Rican poet named La Bruja [Caridad de la Luz] whom I really adore. And wow, oh, Sapphire. Let's see who else. Sapphire and I used to study dance with the same teacher in San Francisco [California], Raymond Sawyer. And I guess that's about it. Story_ID: 659910 Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point; poems, plays, novels, is there anything you would do differently or change? Speaker 2: I don't understand. Speaker 1: When you look back on your body of work, is there anything you would do differently if you could do it again? Speaker 2: No. Speaker 1: Okay, all right. And what is your favorite--do you have a favorite--well I asked you before if you have a favorite work and you said what you're working on right now, right? Speaker 2: Well, one of my--'Liliane' ['Liliane: Resurrection of the Daughter,' Ntozake Shange] is my favorite I think. Speaker 1: Okay. Speaker 2: And a close second would be 'Sassafrass' ['Sassafrass, Cypress and Indigo,' Ntozake Shange]. Speaker 1: Those, those are the novels right? Speaker 2: Yeah, and for poems I like 'Nappy Edges' [Ntozake Shange] and 'Ridin' the Moon in Texas' ['Ridin' the Moon in Texas: Word Paintings,' Ntozake Shange]. Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Speaker 2: And also 'The Love Space Demands' ['The Love Space Demands: A Continuing Saga,' Ntozake Shange] I like those three. Story_ID: 659911 Speaker 1: We ask this question of everybody: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today? Speaker 2: (Pause) My hope is that we would come to value one another in the communal sense as well as in an interpersonal sense. And I would hope that we would take our ideas more seriously so that our entrepreneurial spirit could become manifest in our communities. I think we dream and then don't follow through on things. And with, with, with real persistence and diligence, so our dreams always seem two steps further than we can reach. But those two steps has to be made. And, and there's nothing wrong with it. It's called hard work. And dream, to fulfill dreams it takes hard work. And focus. And I think we're capable of it, but I think we get discouraged. And I, I'm not gonna go into all the reasons why we get discouraged because they're so obvious. But I also would like us to be more tender with our children. I still see black people slapping their children or spanking them in public, or humiliating them verbally in front of people. And we have to stop that. We have to stop physical and verbal abuse of our children, even if that's the way we were raised. It has to stop. It's a cycle of violence and abuse that continues into one's adolescence and adulthood. And if they're not treated tenderly at some point in their lives, hopefully early and continuing on, how are they going to, to approach anyone else with tenderness if they've never known it? And I'm very distressed by what I see in the supermarket or in the pizza store or the Kentucky Fried Chicken. And the mothers are being mean to the children. And it's supposed to be a family outing where they're gonna get chicken and have a nice time, but instead the children are being continually lambasted or spanked or slapped. And it's very painful to me. Story_ID: 659912 Speaker 1: What today do you consider to be the, the state of women in the world? I think your, your work has, you know, speaks to conditions women have in the world. So what do you, what's the state of it today? Speaker 2: Well I think it was two years ago the UN [United Nations] celebrated the year of the woman. And we discovered that 70 percent of us can't read. There are still child marriages going on. There are still clitorectomies and, and, and things like that where women's vulva are chopped off with broken glass or, or just metal. There is still bondage of women, when you're married, you become the property of a man and you're, you have no respite from his abuse or, or your--his treatment of you. You have nowhere to go. If you go back to your family, you're shamed. And if you go--leave him, his family will not take you. So there's, there's, there are women who are left abandoned and suffering in the name of the law. The laws do this. The laws and custom. And in America it's not that much different because they can't capture rapists, they can't find most of the rapists. They can't find most of the men who kill women and leave our bodies around the, the highway. They can't help us with our children. They take them away and give them to AFDC [Aid to Families with Dependent Children] if we don't make enough money to take care of them and watch over them. If we get a second job and have to leave the children alone, if something happens, we go to jail for, for, for endangering the life of a child when all we were trying to do was support them because there's no government support. And the government doesn't make the men who made the babies support the babies. So I think the condition of women in the world is, is, is a very sad one. And it's very dangerous. Like the children--women in Pakistan and Afghanistan are, are shot or have acid thrown on their face for trying to learn how to read. For trying to learn how to, to improve themselves. It's like a crime. And when we look at women in the, in the international sense, we're in terrible shape. And I think because Americans, North Americans, are so limited in our sense of the world and the international reality we live in, that we sometimes forget how lucky we are compared to a woman in Sudan or a woman in Thailand, or a woman in Argentina for that matter. We, we have to shoulder more of the weight for the enrichment of other women's lives around the world because our lives are not consumed with the obligation to find food, to scavenge for water, or to find a place to sleep, which is what many women around the world have to do. Story_ID: 659913 Speaker 1: What advice or what's your assessment of the state of black male and female relationships today? Speaker 2: Oh, I have no idea. Speaker 1: Okay. You have any advice you could give to black women in that regard? Speaker 2: (Laughter) Any advice, let me see. I'll give you the advice my mother [Eloise Owens Williams] gave me when I was younger and I should have listened. It sounds really awful, but I think it works. You have to find a man who loves you more than you love him. Speaker 1: That's it? Speaker 2: And then you're assured of being treated tenderly and with respect, if that's the case. Speaker 1: Otherwise you have problems? Speaker 2: I think so. Speaker 1: I know men who feel the same way (laughter). Yeah, are things any better now you think than they were when you wrote 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange]? Speaker 2: Are things any better? Our physical safety is not any better. Our, I mean our real physical safety in interpersonal relationships or by strangers. That's gotten worse instead of better. Our financial situation is still tenuous. We still don't have adequate prenatal care or family planning assistance. They've now made it impossible for poor women to have abortions because they're so out of, they're so expensive and you can't use government money to get one. So our ability to really control how we have children, therefore how we can earn a living, is really sort of out of our hands. And I think that without the help of male partners, and I mean equal male partners who share in our lives not in just our sexual activity, but who share in our lives in a serious way, I don't see any way it's gonna get any better. Story_ID: 659914 Speaker 1: What about the state of, of art today? Speaker 2: Oh, I love art today. And I'm especially inspired these days by the African American museum of culture and history [National Museum of African American History and Culture, Washington, D.C.] that opened just a few months ago. There is such amazing work in there. It makes you feel like you've been carried to black heaven. Like 'Green Pastures' ['The Green Pastures,' Marc Connelly] was one thing, but the African American museum is a totally freeing, enriching and empowering experience, and you don't have to die. And you come out feeling so alive. The work is so powerful. And even the, the floors where it's about slavery and Reconstruction, and they have chains that slaves were held in that you can see, that you feel like you can almost touch. And they have scenes of lynchings and ropes from lynchings and all this stuff that is so painful. If you can survive that, then the rest of the museum is like going to heaven. It's so enriching. [HistoryMaker] Richard Hunt has a sculpture, a bronze sculpture ['Swing Low'] on the main floor that is just--it's so powerful. It made me feel like I could fly. And, and the work is just remarkable. The photographs, the visual art, the theater pieces that are there, the fabric pieces that are there are just amazing and it's so, it's so powerful. It makes you feel like people who can create this can do anything. And then I think about, I need to go to the space museum [National Air and Space Museum, Washington, D.C.], after seeing 'Hidden Figures' I need to go to the science museum and see what the blacks have been able to accomplish in the colored only section of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration]. And it's just, it's just--everything is just coming to a new height of awareness for me. And I, I think if we could just share it more openly, not more openly, more frequently, we would be much less apt to have despair and a sense of emptiness or powerlessness. Story_ID: 659915 Speaker 1: Ma'am, could you read us some poetry? Speaker 2: Oh, I'd love to. I, I just started writing again about a year ago when I had that poem rolling around in my head. And ever since then I've been averaging maybe two or three a month, which has been like an amazing experience for me. Sometimes the poems are inspired by music or a person, and sometimes by events. I was quite shaken by the shootings in Orlando [Florida] at the nightclub called the Pulse. And this first poem is called 'Ode to Orlando' [Ntozake Shange]. "The pulse / is common to all of us // letting us know / we can breathe / but / one night / there is only gunsmoke and flames / blood / and dancing feet made still / one night / my daughter who loves to dance / who is gay / would have been there / had she taken her daughter / to a theme park to play and / imagine / and she would have been / climbing over the bodies / sweating / bloody / used to be gleeful bodies now strewn beneath the / disco lights / so eerie sounds jammed with moans and pleas for help / during pride / month the pastel flags covering their bodies / maybe / make believe protection from gunfire / it is wrong / their lives so they must die. These young vital joy seekers in outrageous costume and / vigor / that may be / a jihadi freak / a white trash bigot / a button down business man / whoever feeds the slime of hate and then is amazed at the beings hiding / in the bathroom / with the shooter waiting to die / that could have been my daughter / crouching in the corner / trying not to be seen/ but everything / about her life was to be seen / her wife / her lover / the woman she dedicated her love to / they were open and proud / and visible / now smudged with soot gunpowder and blood / so much blood / from so many bodies / now seeking / breath / at / the pulse. Is to assure us we have // so much heavy breathing / gasps / and / moans / what is to be done now crawling over the bodies / moving / shards of bloody bones / out of the way / an arm / here / a finger separated from a hand and / necks / barely attached to heads / half blown away / are any blacks in here / I don't have anything against blacks / yet / he killed / them 'cause they were there with the gays / they were black and gay / like my daughter / aching / from dragging herself / through the heaps of bloody bodies / shot down in rhythm / with the music they enjoyed / so much they thought / the gunshots were the / bass line / of the music / making them / writhe / wiggle and shake / on the beat / and they were beat down / as they fell one by one / on top of one another their / last breaths reflecting the / joy of dancing / dancing in the face of terror / in slow motion / they ran / to hide anywhere / put / their gay bodies / someplace safe like the / bathroom white / tiled / free of the music / they craved / now silent / except for the signs / of surviving // when would somebody come to stop this / all this bleeding ripped sinews organs exposed / and bones peaking from flesh / who would save them / would anybody come to help my daughter / trapped in / heaps of flesh bleeding and hurt gay so free and joyous / when they came, would anybody be left with a pulse / 49 did not make it / my daughter wasn't there this time." (Pause) That took a lot out of me. It took me a month before I could even write a word about it. But it stayed with me for thirty days and finally one day I was able to write. Story_ID: 659916 Speaker 1: I have one that I really love, which is this one. It's called 'An Actual Poem' [Ntozake Shange]. It's for Chuka, my friend who makes chandeliers and is an OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology]. "Someone once told me / every man is not a poem / but some men are poems in and of themselves / eucalyptus and lilies / harken their coming / slight kisses / betray their tenderness / sometimes hugs bear witness / to dense redwoods and cypress / growing by the Pacific / (unclear) manifest their strength / whole pomegranates / their delicacy / what to do with a poem on two legs / whose touch springs quivers / a su alma un hombre sensibly y / extraordinario en este mundo / dame un momento solamente un momento/ in his presence / and I am blessed / a woman in the realm of a poem / on two legs." And this is one I wrote that's a lot of fun, at least for me it is because it's very unexpected for me and I have to explain to my audience that I did grow up in America, and that accounts for a lot of this poem. So anyway it's called 'Loosening Strings or Give Me An "A"' [Ntozake Shange]. "Yes / I listen to Country Joe and the Fish / yes / I howled with Steppenwolf / yes / Fleetwood Mac was my epiphany / and Creedence Clearwater Revival swept me beneath the waters / Hendrix my national anthem always / yes / Blind Lemon Jefferson and B. B. huddled by my stage door / yes / Chuck Berry lives next to me/ yes / I say Eric Clapton made me wanna have a child named Layla / yes / Sonny Sharrock drew screams out of me / Linda can't eclipse / yes / I remember My Lai and the Audobon debacle / yes / Hamza El Din is a caracole out my mouth / yes / I'll never forget where I came from and / nobody misses me as / I never left / in search of a portrait / of an artist / as a young man / yes / I read Ulysses he came home / yes / oh / yes / I know my / Joyce / I could tell nigga chords meant for me / yes / I'm searching, searching, searching / oh I'm searching for a love to call my own / my Olympics say Circe / the Scylla the Charybdis / any Siren / and alla the Pentagon / yes / Circe / the Scylla the Charybdis / any Siren / and alla the Pentagon / ain't kept / yes / I say / ain't kept / this one / nigga man / from making art out of me / yes / I'm gonna love him all over / and over and over / yes / I'm gonna love him all over / and over and over / 'cause niggas ain't in search of / we / just get discovered / so / yes / I must be in the New World now / yes / I'm in tune / oh / yes / oh / yes / play me / pick / my colored tones / yes / strum my nigga / cords / find / my sharps and flats / let 'em / have / space / oh / yes / oh / yes / I know my Joyce / and Ulysses / he doesn't come home / yes / play me / now / yes / make me all of that / yes / I'll be the bottom or I could just ride / yes / I know my Joyce / and all you got to do is say / baby give me an A / I say / give me an A / yes / Ulysses he done come home / yes / I must be the New World / Ulysses I say he done come home / yes / I must be in the New World / yes / I'm in tune / just yes / oh yes / just play me baby / play me." Speaker 2: Thank you (laughter). There's a reward in poetry sometimes in ways we--I was excited to hear Hamza El Din mentioned (laughter). You know the Nubian musician (simultaneous)-- Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes. Speaker 2: --but I, you know, you know you never know, you know, what you're gonna hear and what you're gonna--but you continue to write, and we continue to appreciate it. Speaker 1: Well thank you. Story_ID: 659917 Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family. We haven't asked about them yet. Can you tell us who's in your family at present (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well first I guess I have my daughter Savannah [Savannah Shange-Binion], and I have my granddaughter Harriett Elsante Desaline Shange Watkins [ph.], who is now two and a half years old. And her mother Kenshata Watkins, M.D., who's a resident in emergency medicine at Tulane University [New Orleans, Louisiana]. My daughter is finishing her dissertation in American studies and anthropology, concentrating on youth of color in San Francisco, California. And she's finishing her dissertation for her Ph.D. at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]. My sister Bisa [Bisa Williams] just retired from the state department [U.S. Department of State] and has taken up consulting with my brother P.T. Williams [Paul T. Williams, Jr.] who is a lawyer. And they work on projects for infrastructure in Latin America and Africa. They've got projects in Rwanda, Senegal, the Cote d'Ivoire and Panama. And my other sister Ifa Bayeza is in the M.F.A. program at UMass Amherst [University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts], and she has written a magnificent trilogy about Emmett Till ['The Ballad of Emmett Till,' Ifa Bayeza]. The second part of which she just finished. The third part is coming next year. And it is tremendous, it is absolutely beautiful. And it's so powerful and so realistic in a esoteric sort of way that it brings tears to my eyes just thinking about the last scene of the second entry. Story_ID: 659918 Speaker 1: What did your parents think about your work? Speaker 2: My parents love my work, except--they love my performance and they love my success. My mother [Eloise Owens Williams] found my use of language rather startling and embarrassing. But my father [Paul T. Williams] had visceral reactions to some of the things I wrote because they were very close to him because he knew people like I wrote about as his patients. And so he, he had--he would sweat and his heart would beat faster and we would worry about him sometimes during my performances. Story_ID: 659919 Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question? Speaker 2: I don't know. Oh, I didn't say what bands I worked with those poems. I have a band that is, that was made up instantaneously of Michael Raye, the pianist and composer and music director; Billy "Spaceman" Patterson [Spaceman Patterson] the guitarist; and Lizzy--Chrissy I mean, Chrissy Raye who's Michael's wife, who sings on the order of Jeanne Lee, Linda Sharrock. And we make up this band that did almost of all the poems [in 'Wild Beauty: New and Selected Poems,' Ntozake Shange], except the poem "On Two Legs" [sic. "An Actual Poem"]. Otherwise, I usually work with Craig Harris, the trombonist on--when I do duets, I work with Craig Harris almost, almost solely, except I have a job coming up with (Unclear) McQueen [ph.]. I try to keep music in my poems as a force for me to deal with, not as accompaniment, but as another voice of the poem. And I've been doing that for thirty years and I'm still doing it. And I find it very gratifying and very challenging. Speaker 1: Do you ever employ other actors or dancers in your poems (simultaneous)? Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I employ dancers. I don't usually employ actors. Story_ID: 659920 Speaker 1: Have you ever thought about trying to duplicate the success of 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange] with actors reading your poetry? Speaker 2: Well I haven't thought about it, I mean people have talked to me about it but it doesn't feel natural. 'For Colored Girls' was an organic phenomena, and it wasn't planned. It just sort of happened. And it would just sort of have to happen again. I have a feeling that some of the work I'm doing with my bands will grow into something more and the work I'm doing with Craig Harris, we've already planned for it to be a song series with a big band and a choir singing the poems to new music that Craig composes for the poems, without them having to rhyme or be changed in any way. So they are growing into new things. They just haven't developed yet because I've just now become able to work. Story_ID: 659921 Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to the--well did I ask you about what you consider to be your legacy? Did I ask you that? Well, then I'm asking it now. What today would you consider to be your legacy? Speaker 2: My legacy? Speaker 1: Um-hm. Speaker 2: (Pause) I guess my legacy is the exploration of the lives of women of color and the right we have to do that, and the complexity and delicacy of our lives to be explored and our strengths to be made obvious and our, our, our dreams and nightmares to become real to others. That's what I think I've created. Speaker 1: Okay. And ma'am, how would you like to be remembered? Speaker 2: (Laughter) As a woman who struggled to stay alive and create beauty. Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you very much. Speaker 2: Oh, you're very welcome...