Sue Warren
Oral History Interview
Interviewed by Mary Larson
October 22, 2010
Stillwater, Oklahoma
Larson

My name is Mary Larson, and today is October 22, 2010. I’m visiting
here with Sue Cupp-Warren on the Oklahoma State University campus
in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview is one of a series with members
of the OSU Class of 1960 who were on campus for their fifty-year
reunion. This is part of the O-STATE Stories Project of the Oklahoma
Oral History Research Program. Sue, welcome back to OSU for your
fifty-year reunion. Were there some special reasons why you decided to
come back for this particular reunion?

Warren

Yes, it’s been so exciting. We always like to come back to campus. I’ve
had such fond memories here. In fact, I met my husband here, and my
daughter went to school here in the ’90s. We always just love coming
back so much. It’s just a beautiful campus. We all three got a good
education here and have had, what I consider, a very good life from the
education that we did obtain while we were here.

Larson

What are some of the things you’re interested in seeing and doing while
you’re back here on campus?

Warren

Well, we walked around yesterday when we came up from Lawton,
where we live now. We walked around and were amazed at the Student
Union renovations. I just could not believe they were adding 350,000
square feet and the $63 million project, and we could hardly get around
for all the construction, so it was real different. We walked up toward
the stadium, and it’s amazing. It’s been a couple of years since I’ve been
back, but there are so many changes, so many new buildings. This
Alumni Center is just wonderful.

Larson

Isn’t it gorgeous?

4

Warren

It is. It is.

Larson

Before we get into your career at OSU, would you tell me a little bit
about where you grew up and a little about your early life?

Warren

I grew up in southwestern Oklahoma, about halfway between Altus and
Hobart on Highway 19, seven and a half miles east of Blair, Oklahoma.
We’re noted around that area for what’s considered Lugert, or Quartz
Mountain. My parents were farmers, and I was very much into 4-H
Club. My dad had two brothers that were here, and aunts. Well, I guess
after the war was over, my uncles came back here. One of my dad’s
brothers was a county agent for several years. He was in Roger Mills
County, Okfuskee County, and Kingfisher County, so the family has a
pretty long line of OSU family. My other uncle helped with the
landscaping here when it was being done around the Student Union and
all in the ’40s. His major was agronomy or something to do with plants
and shrubs and that.
I started here in 1958. I grew up on a farm that we still own the farms. I
grew up on the North Fork of the Red River, and I had a great home life.
We had to work really, really hard because we raised cotton. We had to
harvest the cotton and the maize. My dad would always plant
watermelons and cantaloupes, and we had huge watermelons and
cantaloupes, and we had a big orchard. When I was a kid, we always had
big gardens. My mom canned and sewed, and we had chickens. I entered
my broilers in the broiler shows at Altus at Jackson County, and I
entered pigs and cattle.
We had really a great school and community at Warren, which we still
have a senior citizens center there, which I go over even though I live in
Lawton. I go over about every Tuesday because they have a senior
citizens night, and they have hamburgers and hotdogs and have live
music by some of the old timers. We go over there and enjoy the music
and seeing cousins and old friends. It’s still a very close-knit community
even though we lost our school in about 1961. The Friendship school
burned, so they were going to do away with a lot of the rural schools in
Jackson County. They decided to build a school down in the Navajo
community, which was about three miles from where I grew up. That
was my grandpa’s place, where my Grandma and Grandpa Cupp lived.
They built a new school called Navajo down there, and then they bussed
the kids from Warren and all around there to that new school.
The old school building is still standing. There’s people that live there.
Our first old community building at Warren was a Quonset hut, and then
about five years ago, with the help of the people in the community to

5

build it and some government funding, we did get a wonderful new, big
senior citizens center there at Warren. So the community is still thriving.
They have Sunday lunch for people in the community. There’s a lot of
people from Altus or Hobart that come for Sunday lunch. They have
Monday breakfast and lunch and then Tuesday night music, and then we
have a volunteer fire department there. The community is still pretty
much intact. They’ve built about five new, big, nice homes there around
in the farming community where I grew up.
Larson

About how many people are there now, would you say?

Warren

Not very many, probably a couple hundred there in the little town of
Warren. There’s a café, two churches, a fire department and the senior
citizens. They gave the old Quonset hut to the fire department when we
got the new senior citizens built. There’s a cemetery where my greatgrandparents, my grandparents, and my parents are buried, and my first
husband.

Larson

When did your family come to Oklahoma?

Warren

It was about the late 1800s. They came from Tazewell, Tennessee. A
few years ago we went through there, and there is a Cupp Cemetery
which we visited that my great-great-grandparents were buried there. It’s
on a road about twenty-five miles from Tazewell, up in the mountains.
It’s called Cupp’s Ridge.

Larson

So you have your own family ridge. Not many people can say that.
(Laughs)

Warren

But it was interesting. My dad and two of his brothers and their wives all
went up there for a family reunion several years ago, so we got a hold of
one of the cousins that still lived there, and she could direct us up the
road to the old family cemetery. I grew up about three-quarters of a mile
east of Warren, Oklahoma, and then we lived in two different houses.
Well, three, I guess. I was born a little ways west of Warren, and then in
1944 we moved down. My dad bought a farm on the river, and we lived
there from 1944 to 1956. Then, in 1956 when my Papaw Cupp died, my
grandmother moved to Blair, which is about eight miles. Then we
moved into that house my junior year in high school, so we were about
three-quarters of a mile from the school, from the Warren school where I
went to school. I got a good education there. I was able to go on to
college.

Larson

What was it that drew you to OSU?

Warren

Well, of course, my family—that’s all I heard. Southwestern Oklahoma

6

is a very strong Oklahoma State University base, and, of course, with the
agriculture and the Extension, that’s really all I ever heard. When I did
graduate from high school, I guess I wasn’t quite ready to come this far
because we’d been up here when my uncles and aunts were here for their
graduations and in different things on campus. I started my summer out
of high school in 1957 to Southwestern [Oklahoma State University] at
Weatherford because it was only about an hour from home. I started up
there. I went the first summer and the next year and that summer, and
then the next fall, in ’58, I transferred to Oklahoma State and went and
graduated in three years and four summers.
Larson

What was your major?

Warren

Vocational home economics.

Larson

Is that what you planned on going into when you went to college, or
were you not sure?

Warren

When I first started, I had kind of thought about business, but then with
the influence of my 4-H and my family, and my uncle was already
Extension agent at that time, and I was acquainted with some of the
Extension people, I kind of leaned that way.

Larson

So you had an eye to working with Extension or something similar when
you graduated?

Warren

I had some very strong mentors in the Extension field through the years
as I was growing up, and I think they had a really good influence on me,
directing me.

Larson

And who were some of those people?

Warren

George McKegg was one of our Extension agents in Jackson County,
and then Errol Hunter was from our community, from Warren, and he
was the director of the OSU Extension here in Stillwater at the time. We
knew him. Then after he left, Jimmy Netherton is another one that grew
up at Warren, became Extension. I don’t know who all you remember
here but…

Larson

There’s a strong Extension background in that neck of the woods.

Warren

Yes.

Larson

Within your major, what were some of the classes you remember, or
even outside of your major? Were there things that had a particular
impact on you?

7

Warren

Oh, yes. Well, I remember in my foods chemistry, we had to draw for
one of our final tests. We had to draw to see what foods we had to
prepare. My lab partner and I—and I believe she was Pakistani. I don’t
remember her name. It’s been too long, but I can see her face. We drew
rhubarb sauce. I would have been lost except for my Grandmother Cupp
used to raise rhubarb, and she would make strawberry rhubarb pies. So
we had to take the rhubarb and prepare it from scratch, and that was part
of our final test. I was accustomed to using a pressure cooker because
my mother canned a lot. Also, Mom would pressure roast or pot roast
and potatoes and carrots and just a wonderful pressured meal. So we got
the pressure cooker out, and we pressured that rhubarb, cleaned it and
pressured it, added some sugar, and I believe we added some red food
coloring to make it look like more rhubarb because it wasn’t all that red,
best I can remember. And so we made it through foods chemistry.
(Laughs)

Larson

That was certainly a trial by fire. So at the end of that course how much
of your final grade was based on the lab work?

Warren

I think it was a third, and that was over in the old foods and nutrition
building, which is on—this is what, Hester?

Larson

Yes.

Warren

Okay, it was up there, about halfway between here and the stadium on
the west side, so we had to walk all the way from homemaking, the HES
[Human Environmental Sciences] building, over here. And at that time,
it seemed like a long walk across campus to make our classes. That’s
one of the things that come to mind. At first we were aghast that we
would have to fix a dish like that because we thought that we would
have to do something common. Anyway, we got through that, and then
Dr. Ilse Wolf was our home management supervisor. Jerry Gill asked
me, “What do you remember about your senior year?” And I said,
“Well, not very much.” My husband and I got married in September of
1959. We would have been married fifty years, last year. He passed
away in ’04. We got married. I started my senior year. I had to live in the
home management house one semester and then do my student teaching,
so I was really pretty busy my senior year.
We had two home management houses then. Dr. Ilse Wolf was the
supervisor of what we called the new home management house, north of
the campus. Betty Brannan was supervisor of the south home
management house. Well, everybody said Dr. Wolf was really, really
strict. Well, anyway, I drew the stricter, so I participated in the new
home management house under Dr. Wolf, and that was quite an

8

experience. We had to go there early, have breakfast, and then go to
class. That winter was so cold! We had to walk from the home
management house to HES in the snow and cold and then go back up
there for our meals and to run that house. We had to do the grocery
shopping and everything. We usually didn’t get away from there until
about ten o’clock every night because we had to…
Larson

And did you do that your first semester, senior year, or was that second
semester?

Warren

I believe that was the first semester of my senior year.

Larson

That must’ve been tough. You’d just gotten married, and then you were
involved in the home management house from early in the morning until
ten o’clock at night.

Warren

My husband was working at Safeway. Then the second semester, we did
our student teaching at Glencoe, where Larry Shell is from. I taught with
his mother-in-law, Maxine Childers. She had five daughters, and he’s
married to one of those daughters, Christy, who I taught in 1960, ’61, I
guess it was. That was a great year. It was an old school. It had holes in
the wood floor, and my high heels would catch in the boards. (Laughs)
But we had a great superintendent. We had a great principal, Mr. Horace
Smith, who we called Smitty. Even though he was superintendent, he
liked to be called Smitty. He was our superintendent, and then Mr.
Thomas was our principal. All of the teachers were so great. Jack
Pritchard was the vocational FFA teacher when I was FHA teacher, so
we just had a great working relationship. Then after I left, they got a
brand new school. (Laughs)

Larson

Never fails.

Warren

But, it was a good year. Then I moved to San Antonio and taught second
grade down there.

Larson

Well, if we can go back a little bit to some of your classes and your
teachers, you mentioned a few faculty members who were influential in
your development at school. Are there others whom you haven’t
mentioned that had an impact?

Warren

Let’s see. I think Miss [Mary Beth] Carter, (did I mention her?) foods
and nutrition. Dr. Wolf. Of course, Dr. O’Toole, Lela O’Toole was dean
then. Miss Anna May Johnson, I believe was her name, was my advisor.
Oh, my goodness! It’s hard to remember. I believe Dr. [Kathryn]
Greenwood was HID, [Housing and Interior Design] and that was a nice
course. I can’t remember the other man’s name that was one of our

9

interior design… During that time, it just seemed like the college was
just starting to boom, the College of Human Environmental Sciences. I
stayed connected with the Oklahoma Vocational Group and the
American Home Economics Association group for several years after
that. I just felt that I got such a good education that I was able to do a lot
of different occupations with the background of work that I had gotten
here. Everyone was so helpful. It just seemed like everyone was so
professional here, and I admired that in a lot of my instructors.
Larson

If we could talk, maybe, a little bit about student life outside of the
classroom. Where did you live when you were going to school?

Warren

My first year, I lived in Willard Hall. I’m a Woman of Willard, and that
was a really good experience. I lived on, I think it was the third floor on
the south side, and could overlook Theta Pond, basically. Then that next
year, we got married, and we lived in an apartment. I believe it was on
Duck Street up here, north of the campus. My last summer here, when I
graduated, I had tailoring and tennis. That was a really good summer. I
enjoyed all my classes, and we had a good time playing tennis. I’m not
real sure, but I think that Mike Holder was our tennis instructor, and
he’s, of course, athletic director now. If it wasn’t him, I don’t know. I
didn’t get to go back and look at my yearbook to see specifically, but
whoever it was, we had a really good time playing tennis that summer.

Larson

When you were in the residence hall, when you were at Willard, did they
host dances and other activities?

Warren

Oh, yes. I can remember—as we were walking through the Student
Union yesterday evening, I just commented to Danny that this is where
we used to come and spend time, and, of course, the be-bop, Elvis
Presley was popular then. Oh, we just had some great times. We wore
those big poodle skirts and those loafers and bobby socks. (Laughs) We
had a great time. We had a really good time. We had a lot of nice
entertainment, dances. One thing, I believe it was in ’59, we always went
to all the wrestling matches because my late husband started here before
I did. He actually started in basketball, and he lived in Bennett, I believe,
and he worked at Cordell in the cafeteria. He was going to play
basketball. He was six four, a real good basketball player, but he always
liked the sports here and everything.
That year, we went to the wrestling match, and we were sitting on the
floor watching it. The arena was packed, and they came in and took
pictures. Then we were on the front cover of the Sports Illustrated. I
guess this was 1959. I’ve been intending to look that up too because my
daughter remembers it because her dad would mention that to her off
and on through the years. We were talking about it the other day, and she

10

said, “Remember, Dad used to say that ‘we made the front page of
Sports Illustrated’?” (Laughs)
Larson

If we can find that, we’ll scan a copy and send you the electronic file.

Warren

Oh, okay!

Larson

If we have that at the Library, we will get you a copy. (Laughs)

Warren

But that was interesting.

Larson

You mentioned the Student Union being one place that was a big student
hangout on campus. What were some of the other places, either off or on
campus?

Warren

The Baptist Student Union. Friends and I would go there a lot. That’s
kind of where my late husband and I started dating, and we would play
basketball. There was a basketball court out on the back of it, hoops.
Boys and girls would play together, and so we played a lot of basketball
over there and hung out at the Baptist Student Union. Like I say, went to
a lot of the sporting events. He enjoyed football and baseball and
wrestling. We went to a lot of the musical things and then the sporting
events.
Then our daughter came here in ’91, and she was in the band, the
marching band, the spirit band. She traveled with the basketball team
and the concert band. So starting somewhere about 1990 we started
buying season tickets because we had moved back from Texas to
Oklahoma in 1980. We went the gamut around from Oklahoma to San
Antonio to Houston, (well, he was at Fort Hood) and then back around.
Then in 1980, we moved back to Lawton, Oklahoma. Our daughter was
seven, starting in the second grade, so then, of course, she was being
brainwashed, so we would come to Stillwater. (Laughs) There was never
any question where she was going to school.
Her junior year in high school, the OSU band came through Lawton, and
they were on their way to a ball game at TCU, and we housed all of the
band members. Our Comanche County Alumni Club housed all of the
band members for that overnight. The band came and played at halftime
of the football game in Cameron Stadium, and then we took the kids. We
had, like, five or six girls at our house, and that was a great thing for her
to get to interact with those band members. Then the next year, when we
brought her and dropped her off at school, it was harder on me than it
was on her because she had all these friends that she had met and kind of
stayed in contact with her senior year. We let her out, and she just
toodled right on over there to the Seretean Center, just as happy as she

11

could be, after we got her unpacked at Kerr-Drummond. I cried all the
way home to Lawton! (Laughs)
Larson

Well, speaking of student activities, what kinds of things were you
involved with when you were in college?

Warren

I was in Omicron Nu, the honors homemaking organization. I really
can’t remember. Like I say, it was a lot of classroom and studying and
preparing lesson plans for student teaching and home management
house. (Laughs)

Larson

And if you got through that quickly, you were taking a lot of credits, so
you probably wouldn’t have had time for much else. (Laughter)

Warren

I didn’t have time for a lot. It just kind of seems like a whirlwind today,
but it was good, and I was really happy to graduate.

Larson

What were some of the student traditions during the time you were at
OSU?

Warren

Oh, student traditions.

Larson

Did they have Howdy Week that you remember, or emphasis weeks,
where they had maybe an Ag Week or an Engineering Week? Do any of
those sound familiar?

Warren

I think they did, but I don’t really remember. I remember Homecoming
was a big thing, and, of course, the ball games. I guess we were more
geared into the sporting events.

Larson

Did they still throw guys in Theta Pond when they got pinned or
engaged?

Warren

Yes, they did.

Larson

Did your husband get thrown in when you got engaged? (Laughs)

Warren

You know, I don’t remember. I bet he did, but I don’t remember that.

Larson

Speaking of things like that, when you were there, they would’ve had
curfews for the dorms.

Warren

Yes, yes.

Larson

Were the men’s and women’s curfews different? Do you remember
anything about that?

12

Warren

I know I think I had to be back over there by eight o’clock every night. I
think the guys were a little different. I think they were.

Larson

Was there ever any grumbling about that?

Warren

No, no. I can’t remember that there was because it seems like in my
time, we were pretty disciplined. Our parents had pretty much instilled
in us that we did what we were supposed to do. I think it was a little bit
more structured then.

Larson

You mentioned attending sporting events. What do you remember about
the teams and the athletic events when you were in college?

Warren

I don’t remember very much about that. I really don’t remember very
much about the sporting events then. I remember kind of seeing some of
the wrestlers, I think. Myron Roderick, I think, was wrestling during that
time, and then the heavyweight was [inaudible]. I know OSU had a
really, really good wrestling team. I don’t remember who some of the
players were. I guess I should. To me, we went, and we enjoyed it. My
late husband could tell you the names of all of them through the years,
but I didn’t keep up with that as much.

Larson

What were some of the traditions around Homecoming? You had
mentioned Homecoming before.

Warren

I think it’s kind of like it is now. It was real upbeat, and people would
get really hyped up and always want to beat whoever we were playing,
especially K-State. Then, of course, Bedlam, when we played OU was
really, really hyped.

Larson

Were the house decs as important as they are now?

Warren

I don’t think so. I think that started taking place more, probably, in the
late ’80s. Right before my daughter got here in’91, it seems like it was
really, really strong. When she left here, like in ’95 or ’96—let’s see.
The last year we were here was ’03. We came up in the fall of ’03, and it
was big then.

Larson

Did you have the parade?

Warren

I don’t remember the parade when I was here in the late ’50s and ’60. I
don’t remember the parade. That was fifty years ago.

Larson

Do you remember the first Pistol Pete mascot? Do you remember him
being around while you were here on campus?

13

Warren

Pistol Pete was here when we were here, yes, and it’s always been a
favorite mascot.

Larson

In terms of getting away from campus, how often did you manage to go
home while you were in school?

Warren

Not very much because when I came here, I didn’t have a car and come
from a poor farm family. Mom and Dad brought me to campus and left
me, and I had to find a ride home with friends. Then, after I met my
husband, I would ride home with him. He had a car. He was from Duke,
Oklahoma, just outside of Altus, but we didn’t go home very often. They
didn’t have the interstates fixed. We would have to go on what we called
the back roads through, I guess, Kingfisher, Okarche, and down that
way. We didn’t have a lot of money, and we just didn’t go home very
often. Probably two or three times a semester was about it.

Larson

Did many students have cars on campus at that point?

Warren

No. My mom would make me clothes and mail them to me.

Larson

Always good to have a mom who’s a seamstress. (Laughter) Do you
remember any new buildings that were built while you were at OSU, or
any new programs or majors that were added?

Warren

I can’t remember the year that the Seretean Center was built, but it
might’ve been somewhere around that time. I believe they might’ve built
the Education Classroom Building somewhere about that time. Let’s see.
I believe Stout was there, and Willard, and the older part of HES
homemaking was there. They still had the veterans housing out there.
None of those new apartments were built. They were built about the time
my daughter was here, somewhere around ’91 or so. The dorms were not
co-educational then, absolutely not. Old Central was here. I believe
Morrill was here. I believe that’s where Extension was, and, of course,
Campus Corner was completely different. Seems like they might’ve built
a new engineering building during that time, but I can’t remember those
specifics. (Laughs)

Larson

Well, it’s quite a distance at this point. (Laughter)

Warren

Fifty years is a long time! (Laughs)

Larson

Yes, exactly! Were there any big issues on campus when you were here?

Warren

No, I really wasn’t into politics at that time.

14

Larson

Not even just political, but I mean any big trends with maybe some of the
guys coming back from the Korean War, or if there were a lot of GIs on
campus, people doing the GI Bill. I just didn’t know if any of that was
having an impact.

Warren

No. My husband went into the army—he was drafted in December of
’59. He had graduated in the summer, gotten his Bachelor of Fine Arts,
and he didn’t have a teaching certificate. I was teaching at Glencoe, and
he started to school that fall, or summer, I guess. He took some classes
that summer working on his teaching certificate. He had done his student
teaching at the elementary school here in Stillwater, first grade, in art,
then he was drafted the first of December. Well, he had already
completed his student teaching and had everything finished, and they
took him to Oklahoma City to the induction station on the bus around
the first of December. He called me, and he said, “I don’t have but a
minute. You’ve got to listen to me. I’m headed to Fort Hood. Go and
withdraw me from all of my classes. I’ll see you in two weeks.”

Larson

And that was it.

Warren

And that’s the way it was, so that’s what happened. I had to come over
here from—we were living in Glencoe at the time, and he was
carpooling with some people to the campus. Luckily, he had everything
done, and so they went ahead and gave him his teaching certificate, and I
withdrew him. Then he started basic training at Fort Hood at Killeen,
Texas, and then he got a furlough Christmas that was two weeks away.
He got a furlough. He came home for, I guess, a week, and then he went
back. I finished out through June at Glencoe because I was on a twelvemonth contract. I finished out through June, and he had been transferred
to Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio by then. He came and got me, and
we moved to San Antonio. That was the year that I taught at Glencoe
and then got a job in San Antonio that next summer, the summer of ’61.
I think I got the dates right. That was kind of a trying experience there.

Larson

Well, just to come up with some sort of finalizing comments on your time
at OSU, how do you think attending OSU impacted your life?

Warren

Oh, tremendously. It was an experience. No one can tell you—there’s no
words to explain leaving home and going and having a college
experience. When I graduated from high school, my daddy told me, he
said, “Honey, you can do whatever you want to do, but I’ll tell you one
thing. If you get a college education, that’s something that nobody can
ever take away from you.” And he said, “That’s something that you’ll
have the rest of your life,” so I went for it. I knew that I wanted to come
to OSU, but after the year down there, when I got some of my basics out
of the way, I was able to go home more. So by the time that I left

15

Weatherford and came up here that next summer, then I was kind of
ready to get in the groove and face college life because I had lived on
campus at Weatherford. I knew, at that point, I had enough experience
with professors and studying and scheduling my time and knowing what
I needed to do, that when I came up here, I was ready to really dig in and
see the light at the end of the tunnel where I could keep focused on my
education and to become a successful member of society, I guess.
Larson

Obviously your OSU experience influenced you because you’ve been
involved with the Alumni Association down in Lawton. Do you want to
talk just real briefly about that and your role there?

Warren

When my daughter started school up here in ’91, Brad Burdick was our
regional director down there, and Jerry Gill was the executive director.
My daughter got a job at the alumni office, and she volunteered me to
Brad Burdick. “Oh, my mom will be…” because they were looking for
someone to grab the Comanche County president’s job and run with it. I
said, “Okay,” so I did. It was a great experience. It was a lot of work. It
took a lot of time. Luckily, we had our own printing business, so I could
print brochures and invitations, make phone calls and solicit money for
the functions that we had. My late husband was right there behind me
because he bled orange.
With her being at the Alumni Association, she did get a PLC
[President’s Leadership Council] scholarship. She was plugged in, and
she was on the Student Alumni Board, and so she was very much
plugged into the alumni group. That was wonderful because that kept her
motivated, and it kept me motivated to work for the university and try to
increase our Comanche County alumni group. I guess I was president for
ten years. I haven’t looked back on the records to see because, at the
time, I had sick parents, and I was doing the alumni, and I was trying to
run a business and things just kind of—I always took on more that I
could probably handle. It was wonderful, and it has instilled in her, also,
a passion for being in the band and that kind of thing. It has instilled in
her a good work ethic and volunteerism. There are just so many things
that words cannot explain about your relationships with OSU and how
much it helps you in your overall life.

Larson

I want to thank you very much for your time today and for sitting here
and taking time out of your schedule when I know it’s very busy with
Homecoming week. Thank you so much for coming in, and thank you for
being part of this project.

Warren

Well, I hope that some little things will help. I really have enjoyed it. It’s
been a fantastic time. We always just love to come back to the campus.
It’s a special place, and they do such a wonderful job. I’ll tell you, the

16

first time that I talked to Judy Horn the other day, when I really found
out that we probably would be able to come, everybody has been so kind
and so helpful, and the arrangements have just been wonderful. We had
a great time this morning. It’s just been fabulous. You know that they
did honor me with an alumni service award. I believe it was 1995. I
don’t know if you knew about that or not.
Larson

No.

Warren

I looked for the little brochure, but there were five of us that year that
they honored. Mr. Ellis from Hobart, and me, and I can’t remember the
names of the other fine people that had helped with alumni
organizations. That was such an honor. I was so shocked. But everybody
that I’ve worked with here, they’ve just been wonderful.

Larson

Thank you again for your service to OSU and for talking to us today. We
do appreciate it.

Warren

I enjoyed it, Mary. Thank you.
------- End of interview -------

17

