Dorothy Leven
Oral History Interview
Interviewed by Juliana Nykolaiszyn
October 22, 2010
Stillwater, Oklahoma
Nykolaiszyn

My name is Juliana Nykolaiszyn, and today is October 22, 2010. I am
visiting with Dorothy Leven on the Oklahoma State University campus
in Stillwater, Oklahoma. This interview is one in a series of interviews
with members of the OSU Class of 1960 who are back on campus for
their fiftieth-year reunion today. This interview is part of the O-STATE
Stories Oral History Project of the Oklahoma Oral History Research
Program. Thank you so much for joining us today.

Leven

I’m very glad to be here.

Nykolaiszyn

Let’s begin by learning a little bit more about you. Where are you from?
Where did you grow up?

Leven

I grew up in Lansing, Michigan. I always wanted to be a teacher, and so
when it came time to go to college, first of all, I went to St. Mary’s
College of Notre Dame in Notre Dame, Indiana, across from good old
Notre Dame. They had a good education program there, but I had taken
a home economics course, and I really liked it. Actually, it was a foods
and nutrition course in home economics, and I thought, “You know, that
might be an area I would like to concentrate in.” So I knew that that
wasn’t a major college for that. They were basically liberal arts.
I had a friend there from Oklahoma, and when she learned that I was
interested in, maybe, dietetics, food and nutrition, institutional
management, she said, “I’ve got the place for you.” She was from
Oklahoma City, but she knew a lot about Oklahoma State University
because her boyfriend went there. She said, “I think you should look into

4

that.” So I went to the library at the college and got the catalog. I liked
the curriculum, and it sounded very friendly. We are talking, you know,
back in—this would’ve been ’57 because I was already in college the
first year.
It sounded very nice. I have to say that was one of the best college
catalogs I had read as far as friendliness and really making you feel
welcome there at the school. So I decided to enroll, much to my parents’
chagrin, because they thought I should go to school closer to Michigan
or Michigan State, which was actually rated one slot higher at that time
in nutrition because there was Cornell, then Michigan State, and then
Oklahoma State was rated number three because they had a dietetic
internship already at that time. This was over fifty years ago.
I went ahead and enrolled and went to school there. I graduated after
three years in 1960, and I have to say, it was just an excellent choice. I
am just so happy I made that choice to come to Oklahoma State. It was
just as good as the catalog promised. They gave me every help, anything
that I needed. The faculty was very good. Anytime I needed any
counseling of any type, academic counseling, I had help everywhere. I
really can’t say enough about it, and this is a Michigander talking,
coming down as a Yankee, down to Oklahoma.
Nykolaiszyn

What were some of your first impressions? First, how did you get to
Stillwater?

Leven

I took the train. My parents actually did not come down with me. I
thought maybe they were going to because they were a little concerned
about me going away so far from home, but, actually, I took the train
down, and my friend from Oklahoma was with me. There were
orientation activities going on, and she actually stayed with me during
orientation. She ended up going to OU, but they didn’t start at the same
time, so she stayed with me a few days. She said, “I think you’re going
to be happy here.” I encountered no big obstacles. Like I say, everyone
was very friendly. My dorm was very good, I thought. It was Murray. II
had nice roommates. It was very nice, a very good transition.

Nykolaiszyn

Did you remain in Murray your whole time?

Leven

No, I actually only was in Murray a year, and I met other people, other
gals, who were in Willard, and so I changed to Willard and had another
really nice roommate. I became quite active in Newman Club on campus
and was president of that within about another year. I met some
wonderful friends through there. In fact, one of them who was in
Newman Club was Allen Reding, who I saw today for the first time in
about thirty years. He was the Hotel and Restaurant Director [at OSU]

5

for a certain number of years. I can’t remember how many. That was
nice to see him, besides my three other classmates of ’60 who were in
foods and nutrition.
Nykolaiszyn

What is Newman Club? I’ve never heard of that.

Leven

It’s a Catholic students association on campus. We had a church service
there on Sunday. If not there, we would go into town to that church, but
if there was an [extra] priest, sometimes he would say mass out there.
They had regular meetings and socials. I don’t know how many—I
actually compiled a [student] directory that second year, I think, and we
had quite a few Catholic students there, a lot of them here on campus.
Quite a few of them did show up at Newman Club on, I think it was
Friday night, maybe, or Saturday night. It’s been too many years for me
to remember which. It was a nice [place] for meeting [people]. Of
course, there were the other organizations on campus [I belonged to],
and to tell the truth, I can’t remember all of them except I was elected
into [an HES] honorary, because I saw my picture over there today in the
HES [Human Environmental Science] Building. (Laughs) I found
myself and one of my classmates in that picture. Those two
organizations, and I believe that one was for grades. Do you know which
one I mean?

Nykolaiszyn

I do not.

Leven

[Phi Upsilon Omicron] or something like that. Yes, and maybe there
were one or two other organizations I was in, but you know, it’s just the
most welcoming place. What’s not to like about Oklahoma State?

Nykolaiszyn

While you were here did you have a job?

Leven

I did not. Most of my friends did have jobs, telephone operator, working
in the lunchroom and that. I didn’t need to at that time. My folks—
actually I think I asked them about it, if they’d like me to. I think they
said, “Right now we can afford to send you, so just go with that. If you
want a job later, you can get it.” But it was a pretty daunting curriculum,
too, and they knew with all the chemistry and everything that I had that
it would be good to have the extra study time.

Nykolaiszyn

Let’s talk about the curriculum.

Leven

Okay.

Nykolaiszyn

What were some of the classes you remember taking?

Leven

I probably remember my first-interest classes the most, which were

6

foods and nutrition, quantity cookery, diet therapy. I was very interested
when I first started out in foods and nutrition, of eventually being able to
volunteer in the community and maybe other countries in helping with
food programs and feeding programs for the poor, Third World country
type of thing. I kind of started out with that interest, so those things
appealed to me, but really just anything in foods and nutrition [where I
could fill a community need].
I am kind of science oriented, and so everything behind it, chemistry,
biology, physiology, and microbiology, and all of the things we took
were very interesting. I’d have to say all of those were interesting, but
being in the School of Home Ec, even though we were concentrated in
foods and nutrition and science, we still had the requisites of the home
ec school. So, we had to take certain things like clothing, interior design,
et cetera, and I enjoyed all those, too. I really did. It was a well-rounded
program even way back then.
Nykolaiszyn

Did you have to spend time in the practice house?

Leven

I think we did. (Laughs) One of my classmates reminded me of that, and
for some reason I don’t really remember that. She said she thought we
spent about a week in there, and I kind of remember doing that. I
remember doing meals, like three meals a day for a certain amount of
time, but I just didn’t remember staying overnight. She reminded me.
She said, “Well, I think we did.” Whether we did or not, [after] fifty
years I can’t quite remember, but I do remember the meals and preparing
everything, buying everything, going to the stores, if that is what you’re
referring to. I don’t know what they called it then.

Nykolaiszyn

Any instructors or advisors that stand out?

Leven

Yes, oh yes. We had wonderful instructors. We had Mary Leidigh, and I
believe she passed on a couple of years ago. We had Ms. White, Ms.
Carter, Ms.—I believe her name was Barnes. Those were our major ones
because we were not a very big department. I know there were other
instructors, but those were the major ones. They were here—I’m not
sure how many years they all taught here, but they were here for a while,
most of them ten or twenty years, I’d say.

Nykolaiszyn

Any of them have a big impact on what you were doing?

Leven

Yes. I think they were interested in all of our goals. There were only,
like I say, six or eight in our [major]. And probably just because of our
numbers being so small, they could really concentrate one-on-one with
all of us because we all had the same feeling about it. We really got a lot
of attention from them and a lot of personal interest, so that was

7

wonderful, to have that with an instructor really taking an interest in
what we’re interested in. They liked the idea of what I had wanted to do
eventually because I didn’t, per se, just want to go into hospital dietetics
at the clinical level as much as going out and doing feeding programs
other places, places where people were poor and that type of thing and
doing feeding programs. They were interested in all the different ways
that the student wanted to use their knowledge gained in nutrition and
quantity cookery.
Nykolaiszyn

Did you have to participate in an internship?

Leven

It was required to be a registered dietitian then, and so I was going to go
to Houston for a VA [Veterans Administration] internship. They had
told me that I could do that if I wanted. It was competitive, but my
grades were such, and my interests, that they let me know I could if I
wanted to. But do you know, my husband and I had decided that we
would get married at the end of graduation, so I decided rather than
going on and doing an internship anywhere, (I could’ve done it either
here at OSU or gone to Houston) we decided to get married and I would
just do an internship later. So that was the plan because I could’ve done
it at any time. As it turns out, you could’ve either done it in a hospital, or
you could do it under a registered dietitian at any hospital. They work
out the program for you. They also had, of course, the internship
programs at a lot of hospitals in the US. I’ll tell you more about that as
you ask questions. I’m sure it will come out on why I didn’t go on with
that part.

Nykolaiszyn

Tell me how you met your husband.

Leven

It was through Newman Club, actually. He was a Catholic student, also.
He was pouring coffee at a church breakfast or something that Newman
Club was putting on, and I met him. He was very, very nice. He is from
Newkirk, Oklahoma, so he [lived] not too far, maybe an hour-and-a-half
drive or something away from here. I met his parents, and they were
very nice, too. That’s basically how we got together.

Nykolaiszyn

So what was a typical date like?

Leven

Oh, maybe going to a Newman Club activity or going somewhere on
campus. They used to have some movies, some cheap movies,
somewhere. Being students, we were pretty frugal. Just things like that,
maybe. He was in Farm House fraternity, so we had some functions over
there to go to. But the thing is, he was only really here when I was here
for about a year because he graduated in ’58, and I really wasn’t down
there until ’57. He went over to [UMSU to] do his master’s. He got an
assistantship at New Mexico State. He actually wasn’t here, so we

8

corresponded, you know, phone calls, letters, and an occasional visit, but
it was kind of a long distance relationship after he left here. Then we got
married when I graduated [in 1960].
Nykolaiszyn

Were you involved in any sororities?

Leven

The one I was telling you about, which was an honorary type of thing.
We did have some activities through that, but to be honest I can’t
remember because there weren’t a lot of things. It does seem to me like I
did do something. We had some activity that I helped with, but to tell the
truth, I didn’t bring that documentation with me. I probably should have
looked it up. I didn’t even think about that question, but we definitely
had some things going on through that.

Nykolaiszyn

Dances…

Leven

I don’t think dances as much as maybe something else with, maybe,
scholarships, maybe working with kids at high schools or something.
There were different things we could’ve done. I know that.

Nykolaiszyn

Service…

Leven

Service-type of things. To be honest, I didn’t really get involved in that
part of it, I just sort of did the basic things [of being a college student,
studying hard for my grades].

Nykolaiszyn

What do you remember about Homecoming when you were a student?

Leven

Oh, it was just so much fun! It was just like now, coming back. They had
all of the fraternities and sororities and campus residence halls all
decorated. I worked on a float or two before for the residence halls. Just
really nice. I have to say homecoming is really a lot of fun everywhere.
When I was at St. Mary’s at Notre Dame we had a really nice
homecoming too. I know at Michigan State they had really nice ones, so
it’s just really festive and nice. But I do think Oklahoma State does a
really good job [and has the best school spirit I have seen].

Nykolaiszyn

When you were a student, I know you were busy studying with your
curriculum, but did you take time out for sporting activities?

Leven

I played tennis, but I don’t think I—I may have played in one
tournament. They may have had something going on here on campus,
but I honestly studied a lot, so I did not really spend a lot of time doing
things. I did go to a few football games, but, basically, I studied a lot.
(Laughs)

9

Nykolaiszyn

So tell me what happened as you were getting ready to graduate. What
did you have in your mind? Did you have a plan?

Leven

Well, other than getting married, we couldn’t really plan because my
husband—at that time everybody had to go in the military if they had put
it off to go to college, so we knew that was next. We did want to have a
family right away, so we figured it would be awhile before I would do
my internship. This proved to be true because we moved around, when
he went to the military, and he was in intelligence, Army Intelligence,
working with infrared. He was kind of in demand because it was this
very small unit of people that knew how to read infrared [photos]. That
became very important in defense and all that, so we did move around in
the military, to Hawaii and Baltimore. So I really couldn’t do an
internship. It was really funny because I kept thinking, “Okay, now this
is the year I will do my internship.”
Well, we did have a baby within just a year. We were married about a
year and a month, and we had our baby. I had thought when I had my
second baby, “Okay, now, after the baby is old enough I will do an
internship,” because I basically could’ve done it anywhere where there
was a hospital with a registered dietitian. I thought, “That’ll be easy if I
can find a good babysitter.” We were in Phoenix at the time, and I was
checking out the hospitals. In fact, I was going to, maybe, work at a
hospital under somebody that went [to OSU], and for the life of me, I
cannot remember her name. But our third baby was born with a slight
handicap and was a special needs kid. She had borderline cerebral palsy.
She had to have about seven surgeries in the space of about four years.
By five years, she was okay. There was no specialized daycare back
then, not for any child with special needs. I felt I really did need to give
her my full time and attention, which I did, but on the other hand, it did
give me some leeway on working for the public in community centers
where they needed help. So I taught diet therapy classes and nutrition
classes, and, you know, that worked for me. I felt productive that way,
too. I knew that I really needed to be there for my daughter and my other
two children, but at the same time, I got to give back to the community,
so that was fine, and my husband was making a [good] salary. I didn’t
need to worry about that, thank goodness. I know that doesn’t work for
everyone, but for me it worked.

Nykolaiszyn

Wonderful.

Leven

Would you believe I did that for a long, long time? (Laughs) Once you
start with that and you kind of build on it, they give you bigger and
bigger projects as you go along. I pretty much did stay with that, feeding
programs with the homeless and some community organizations
wherever we’ve been, and now in California. For the last thirty-seven

10

years I have done that. Although, as of about last year, I’ve decided I’m
not doing anymore major programs. (Laughs)
Nykolaiszyn

Well, it has to be very rewarding.

Leven

It has been very rewarding. I know almost all of my friends actually did
go on. They were even able to work when they had their children. I
could’ve actually worked after mine were in school, but by then I was
doing all this other stuff. I kind of hated to have my time infringed upon
when I could be doing what I was doing on my own time. I honestly
have to say, I have no regrets about it just because I have been able to do
what I wanted to and pass on my knowledge.

Nykolaiszyn

Why do you feel it’s so important to give back to the community in this—
it’s kind of an important facet, the whole nutrition education. We don’t
really think about it.

Leven

Yes, I just think it’s important because I feel like I’ve been given an
opportunity that a lot of people haven’t. I’ve been educated in something
which can help the public. There is rampant obesity. There are a lot of
diabetics around that need help and education. People just do not know
what they need sometimes when they have a certain disease or syndrome
or how to feed themselves. I feel like if I can help with that, why not? I
just have always been that way. I just like that.

Nykolaiszyn

Have you been back to campus since…

Leven

Yes, we were here about ten years ago, but we [also] were back early on
after we graduated. Came through here maybe about ten years after I
graduated, and then ten years ago we were here again. So we did see the
growth of the campus. Oh my goodness, all these buildings, beautiful
buildings, a new stadium.

Nykolaiszyn

Lots of changes.

Leven

Definitely. It’s a beautiful campus.

Nykolaiszyn

So we have lots of changes, and what I want to know, I need you to tell
me about the old HES Building.

Leven

Which one? Oh yes, yes. But what did we call it back then? When you
said “old HES,” it was just [called] the Home Ec Building. Oh, it was
old, but lots of good memories there. It suited all of us because we were
such a small group. We would’ve been really hard-pressed if it was
teeming with students in foods and nutrition, but it just wasn’t. There
were a lot of home economics students, and they had their classes there.

11

I’m sure those classes were huge, but we didn’t have all that many [in
FNIA]. I mean, you know, like I did have the clothing and textiles and
interior design. I’m not sure how many I took, probably at least eight or
ten other classes, but in Foods and Nutrition, we did not have big
classes. We did have some hotel and restaurant [students], mostly men in
that field at that time, maybe two women, and they took some classes
with us because that was part of their major. They had to take some
nutrition classes and quantity cookery, but other than that we did not
have large classes. I’ll tell you, our major was the one to be in if you
really wanted one-on-one [learning]. Maybe six students to every one
instructor. It was pretty good.
Nykolaiszyn

What were the classrooms like?

Leven

Like I say, it was an older building. It wasn’t bad or anything.
Everything was painted up, and it was good, but it was nothing like all
these buildings are now. These are all new buildings compared to what
we had. When we went there that building was pretty old.

Nykolaiszyn

Did it have any specialized equipment, refrigerators, stoves?

Leven

Oh, yes, we had everything we needed for our nutrition studies and
things. Although, the year that I graduated, in ’60, they already had the
new HES Building built, and I know they took us on a tour up there, I
believe way up in the top where those windows are. I think they had
nutrition labs, rat labs, and rat study labs because we had a couple of
girls in FNIA [Food, Nutrition, and Institution Administration] who had
research going on. I don’t know if they were going on to Pre-Med or
what, but they had some things going on up there, so we were able to see
those. I believe before that, the old building is where they had these
studies going on. I can’t remember if it was in the basement or what, but
that building was pretty much it for our foods and nutrition classes.

Nykolaiszyn

Did you take classes in any other buildings on campus?

Leven

Oh, yes. We took chemistry, physiology, bacteriology, microbiology.
We took those all over the place.

Nykolaiszyn

Any classes in Old Central?

Leven

Yes, I believe. Now was that the one we had English in? That was that
the big old building. I believe has that been condemned since then.

Nykolaiszyn

The big old building was probably Williams Hall that’s been
condemned.

12

Leven

Maybe. I don’t remember the name, but it had a lot of steps, and we had
huge classes in there. There were other classes we had to take there, too,
like maybe English and history. I can’t quite remember. It’s been a long
time. (Laughs) Yes, we had classes in—I was trying to think. Was it
Whitehurst or maybe the Classroom Building? The Classroom Building
we had some classes in.

Nykolaiszyn

And that was fairly new.

Leven

Yes, that was one of the newer buildings on campus. Of course, the
library was just wonderful. I spent lots of time in the library, and I know
since then it’s been expanded a lot.

Nykolaiszyn

What buildings had air conditioning on campus?

Leven

Oh, I don’t know if any had air conditioning. Did they, back in 1960?

Nykolaiszyn

Well, the library did.

Leven

Oh, the library did, that’s right. I’m glad you mentioned that. That was
where we went to get cool if it was a hot day, but I thought the weather
here in Stillwater was really pretty good. I was never here in the
summer, so basically from May when we got out, and then it started
again in late August or whenever it started, it wasn’t really too bad.
August sometimes was a little bit warm. That’s probably when I
remember that, yes, air conditioning was a real plus. (Laughs)

Nykolaiszyn

Did you ever visit the Y-Hut? Does that ring a bell?

Leven

Do you know, I don’t remember the Y-Hut.

Nykolaiszyn

The little coffee shack?

Leven

No, because we usually went to the Student Union.

Nykolaiszyn

What floor?

Leven

Wherever it was we got the short Cokes. I remember my roommate was
in education, and we’d take a break at 9:30 or 10:00 sometimes when
we’d be studying for an exam and go over for a short Coke. I’d never
heard of that before and thought maybe it was an Oklahoma term, but we
went to the Union, and we’d have a short Coke. It was just a Coke that
was about this tall, you know, just half a Coke by today’s standards. No,
I thought the Student Union was just great. I can see now they’re totally
redoing it.

13

Nykolaiszyn

Yes, it’s going to be awesome.

Leven

Yes, in 1960 it was great. I don’t know when it was built, like maybe ten
years before I was there or five years, because it was pretty new.

Nykolaiszyn

Do you remember, being a nutrition major, the first time you had pizza?
Did you have pizza at Hideaway for the first time?

Leven

I don’t know—was Hideaway there then?

Nykolaiszyn

Yes.

Leven

We probably rarely went there. If we went out, we usually would go
over to the Union. We ate mostly at Willard. Like I say, I was really a
study-holic, I guess you could call me, (Laughs) so on weekends—and
of course, Andy was somewhere else by that time, too, after the first
year, so other than with my girlfriends, we really didn’t do a lot other
than a movie once in a while or something like that, or just going out to
eat close. But I don’t remember Hideaway Pizza. I did just see that on
Thursday, we came through here and went to that spirit store [Chris
University Spirit] next to it, but I do not know. That’s really bad. I don’t
remember Hideaway Pizza.

Nykolaiszyn

They were in a different location then.

Leven

Oh, they were?

Nykolaiszyn

So they weren’t in that location.

Leven

Oh, okay because I remember the fire station and all that, and that is just
across from there, isn’t it?

Nykolaiszyn

Right.

Leven

I don’t why I didn’t know about Hideaway Pizza. (Laughs) We didn’t
have as much money in those days to have those extra treats either. That
would be extra.

Nykolaiszyn

Oh yes, sometimes people will say, “The first time I had pizza was…”
You know, “This strange food!”

Leven

No, no. Oh, I’d had pizza in Michigan, so yes. I thought you just meant
at that specific place. No, I’d had pizza before, and it was good.
(Laughter) We had good pizza in Michigan, yes.

Nykolaiszyn

I want to get back to the food in the dorm. How was meal service in the

14

dorm?
Leven

Meal service, I thought, was excellent in the dorm. Of course, one of the
things being a foods and nutrition major is by the time you’re about
ready to graduate, you yourself go through all of the dorms and their
food service areas and everything, and actually work in them, too. You
know, it’s like a mini-internship, so you kind of get used to that before
you go for your own internship. So I got to see the workings of
everything, but when I was just there before doing that, like my first year
when I was there and I was in Murray, I thought it was very well run.
The only thing I got a little tired of, because I thought the food was
prepared just fine, everything tasted good, pretty good, was that I got
tired of the sameness. They had a revolving menu. You always knew
what you were going to have on each day of the week, so I think it’s just
one of those student things. You know how it is. You know you’ve got
to eat at “X” place, and so you just think, “Oh, I wish I could go once a
week somewhere else.” But I was trying not to spend too much money
because I wasn’t working, myself, and I didn’t want to have my folks
pay for a lot of extra things, so I pretty much just stuck with the dorm
food. That was one of the reasons I wanted to go to Willard, because I
had heard that you had choices there, on what you could eat. I could not
find actually any fault with the food at Murray. You know, just the
sameness of it and not as much variety in what you could choose to eat.
There might be a choice of two entrées whereas at Willard maybe there
were four or five or six.

Nykolaiszyn

Interesting.

Leven

That was the only thing. I know when our kids were in college (they all
went to different colleges in California) it was the same thing. If they
were in the dorm—they all stayed in the dorms the first year, and it was
always the same complaint from students: “I always knew what they
were going to have a certain day,” or, “I can’t wait until I can go
somewhere else, have my own apartment and cook.” (Laughs) And there
is not a thing wrong with the food usually. It’s just the sameness of it.
By necessity they have everything planned out on what they are going to
make at these places. It’s a quantity-cooking situation.

Nykolaiszyn

Sure.

Leven

So I empathize with them. I know they got a lot of complaints, but there
was absolutely nothing wrong with the food.

Nykolaiszyn

Since you kind of had a behind the scenes look at the preparation, did
they ever repurpose? Like if they had leftovers, did they try to create

15

something new?
Leven

Maybe occasionally. Maybe it was just because I knew more about the
food preparation and everything, but I didn’t think they recycled a lot of
stuff. I think once in a while they probably did, but it was in an
appropriate way. Like, if we had roast chicken one night, we might see
leftover chicken chopped up in a salad or something later that week. I
don’t think they took that to an extreme, but there could’ve been more of
that than I knew. When I worked in there I did not see that. As far as in
that mini-internship, I didn’t see them recycle food. I’m not privy to that
information, I guess. (Laughs)

Nykolaiszyn

Do you remember who the president was?

Leven

Gosh, he was a guy with white hair even at that time, but I can’t—do
you…

Nykolaiszyn

Was it Bennett? Or Willham?

Leven

Oh, Willham. I was going to say I would know the name when you said
it. It was Willham, I believe, in ’60. I could be wrong, but I believe it
was.

Nykolaiszyn

I think it was Willham.

Leven

It was either that or he was Alumni Director by then, retired from the—
but I believe it was Willham. Yes. He must’ve been a pretty good
president because everybody really liked the school. I virtually did not
talk to anybody that did not like the school. I guess, I would assume
anyway, that they would leave if they didn’t like it.

Nykolaiszyn

Right.

Leven

I certainly didn’t know anybody that left because they didn’t like it. Yes,
if anybody left—I did know one person that left, but it was financial.
They could not afford to go, had to go back to work, and then came back
later.

Nykolaiszyn

What was graduation like?

Leven

Graduation was very nice. My parents came down from Michigan. My
roommate’s parents came, too. Everybody’s parents came from
wherever, and I just think it was really nice. I don’t specifically
remember a lot because my parents were here and we did other things,
too, but there was a lot planned. Even back then, there was a lot planned
for you to do with your parents. Your families were here, and they made

16

everybody feel very welcome. In fact, it was interesting because my
folks, over the time I was there, maybe that was only the third time they
had been there. They said when I graduated, “We’re really glad you did
come down here. We kind of wanted you to be closer to home, but we’re
really glad. We can see it was a very good school for you.” They were
very impressed with the instructors and the caliber of everything.
Nykolaiszyn

Well, that’s good.

Leven

Yes. It was good. It was a good school to graduate from.

Nykolaiszyn

It’s kind of interesting, you come from Michigan to Stillwater. That’s a
big…

Leven

You know, it is a big thing because I could’ve gone there. But part of it
is you’re a teenager, you want to go away from home and study. It’s
good there, too, but yet on the other hand I did have a recommendation
about how good it was here. I have to honestly say that was one of my
main reasons for coming down, plus the fact that the catalog was so
inviting. Whoever did their catalogs at that time did a really good job of
really nailing everything down as to what you’d be taking. There weren’t
any surprises, and so if that was what you were interested in, then you’d
be well-served to go there.

Nykolaiszyn

When I talk to alumni, I always find that they feel this great loyalty to
Oklahoma State. Why do you think that is?

Leven

I think part of it is because of your good experiences here. You have
good faculty, people smile at you, you see instructors that you have, and
they’ll actually smile at you if you see them somewhere else. You don’t
always see that everywhere. We’re out in California, and we have so
many colleges and universities out there, and I know friends of mine
have said, “You know, I saw that teacher twice or three times a week for
almost a whole year in chemistry, so I knew him or her very well. Would
you think he would speak to me when he saw me out on the street? No!”
And you know very well they know who you are, but maybe they’re just
not interested in talking with students all the time. I know that isn’t
everyone’s experience, but it’s definitely out there that you don’t have
this more personal relationship with your faculty, your instructors. I
think that’s nice. Also, maybe they tell them here to be friendlier to your
students, or if it’s just the friendliness of Oklahoma. I don’t know. I do
know people talk and say hello on the street a lot more. In California you
do not say hello to everybody you see on the street. (Laughs)
I really think it’s unique to Oklahoma.

Nykolaiszyn

17

Don’t you think?
Leven
I’m not from here, but it’s very unique.
Nykolaiszyn
Leven

I think so. I do. Or students, if you’re walking down the street or
something, a lot of students will say hi to you, you know. That’s kind of
nice.
Well, you’re back here for your fiftieth reunion.

Nykolaiszyn
Yes.
Leven
Wow, fifty years.
Nykolaiszyn
I know. Makes me feel old! (Laughs)
Leven
What are you looking forward to most this weekend?
Nykolaiszyn
Leven

Well, I was looking forward most to this today. Not the interview
particularly, but that was fine. I only found out I was going to do it about
three or four days ago. (Laughter) But seeing my classmates. I have kept
up with half of them in my class, and those people were here today. As I
said, there were four of us total here today besides our husbands being
here, and so I was looking forward to touching base with them again.
Also, I have a niece who graduated from here, and she was at the
luncheon today. She is now a 4-H Extension agent in Tulsa County, I
think. Her daughter is an HES major. She is in nutritional science, I
think they call it. Now they’ve got about six different areas you can
major within the foods and nutritional sciences. Back then, we only had
the one which included several different things. You had to cover foods,
nutrition, and institutional management. Now you can be nutritional
science, you can do this, you can do that, go into pre-med. She may go
into pre-med, but she’s in nutritional sciences now. I was really looking
forward to seeing them, and they were at the luncheon sitting with me
and with my classmates, so that was very nice to have a niece and
grandniece who is a student here now.
Keeping it in the family.

Nykolaiszyn
Leven

Yes, yes. The other thing I was looking forward to was seeing about—
oh, gosh, we must have eight or nine other nieces and nephews who [are
going to OSU or] graduated from here because they are all from the
Ponca City area and the Newkirk, Oklahoma City, and Edmond area. So
we have actually quite a few family that have gone here.
Wonderful.

18

Nykolaiszyn
Leven

Yes, we’d have our own cheering section. In fact, we will have
tomorrow at the game. My husband’s going to be at the game with a lot
of them.
Wonderful. Are you going to the game?

Nykolaiszyn
Leven

Actually, I can’t. One of the reasons I’m not doing my community work
so much anymore is my arthritis has gotten quite bad, so I can’t actually
sit in the stands for however long it takes, two or three hours. I need to
get up and walk a lot, so I’m not going to the game. But there will be
other people who aren’t going to the game in our family, so I will be
with them.
Good.

Nykolaiszyn
Leven

Nykolaiszyn

Leven

We will check the game on monitors wherever we are. (Laughter) I
don’t know where we’ll be, but we will be either in our families’ homes
or somewhere on campus.
Well, we kind of did a little fast forward through your life here at
Oklahoma State and got caught up with what you’re doing. Is there
anything else you’d like to share with us before we end our interview
today, anything we’ve missed?
I don’t think so. Let me just check and see if there was anything else. I
think maybe I told you most everything as far as what I was trying to do,
even though I wasn’t able to be in the workforce. Maybe I skipped—
actually there was one year we were at New Mexico State University
living there after our marriage, so we were there for one year [while my
husband got his MS]. Then we went to the Army. Oh, I forgot that part.
That was just the best job in the whole world. I was dietitian and
catering manager of the brand new Student Union they had.
Oh, wow.

Nykolaiszyn
Leven

It was a huge Student Union. It was the biggest thing on campus. That, I
have to say, was the most fun job in the whole world. But you can
probably tell I get excited about the quantity cooking and quantity
feeding programs. So we had 2,500 students, I don’t know how many
faculty, and then visitors that came each day to eat there. That was really
just more fun to plan menus and see everything through the whole
production of the foods. We had alumni functions. We might have eight
or ten functions going on at the same time we were feeding the students
in the day. Of course, there were lots of people to help, but I got to direct
that. It was just fun. To me that was fun. It wasn’t really work. Of

19

course, that was before we had any kids or anything, so, you know,
things change.
Well, it’s good that you were able to bring passion to…
Nykolaiszyn
Leven

Yes, I would say I had a passion for it. It was fun for me. That’s right. I
had forgotten to tell you about that, but I think I’ve told you about
everything else, basically. That, and I was going to say I did do
fundraising, too, besides actually planning out menus and meals and all
that. I did do fundraising, also, out of the nutrition field a little bit into
just the community center area where I did teach classes [over my
lifetime].
I know this one place really needed fundraising on a big scale to build
their center and had no funds. They were trying to get federal funds but
still had not received them, so we did a fundraising cookbook, and we
had lots of people involved. This was in Oakland, California, and it
really got the community involved. The women that were in my classes,
many of them with high blood pressure brought in their precious family
recipes, and we compiled this cookbook. We did raise a lot of money for
the center, which pleased me because there were after-school programs
for the kids. The community benefitted from that, so the fundraising, I
would say, is the only other thing I would add.
I liked helping with that because, often people haven’t had the
opportunity of education like I have. They don’t know how to talk to the
right people to get funds to do whatever they wanted to do at the center,
[such as] the educational programs. So that’s just something I could do
for them, and I was glad to do it as long as I had the time to do it, and I
did. I was glad to do fundraising, and I did other things, too, you know,
Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, and all that type of thing.
And now retirement.

Nykolaiszyn
Leven

And now retirement, so now we just have fun. We go on trips, and we do
whatever we want to do on our own time. The only thing is by the time
you get to my age, (I’m now seventy-one) it’s like the body starts going
out a little bit. Now we have the time and money to go on trips, but the
body doesn’t always want to cooperate. But we still do our share. We’re
very blessed to have fairly good health at this age.

Nykolaiszyn

Well, we welcome you back to Oklahoma State and your fiftieth reunion
here, and I wish you many more.

Leven

Well, thank you. I feel very welcomed. [OSU is a great school to
graduate from.]

20

------- End of interview -------

21

