Rhonda Hooper
Oral History Interview
Interviewed by Jerry Gill
December 5, 2010
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
Gill

My name is Jerry Gill, and today is December 5, 2010. I’m visiting with
Rhonda Hooper here in her office in Oklahoma City. This interview is
for the O-STATE Stories Project of the Oklahoma Oral History
Research Program. Rhonda, thank you for taking time from your hectic
professional schedule to spend some time with us today.

Hooper

You’re certainly welcome, Jerry. As you know, I’ve been beaten up the
last few days, so hopefully I can sustain and keep it up. (Laughs)

Gill

Just smile as much as you can.

Hooper

Yes. (Laughs)

Gill

Rhonda, obviously we want to talk about your long, rich, and lengthy
relationship with Oklahoma State University, but I want to first of all
start off with your early life, where you grew up, and a little bit about
your family. Can you share some stuff with us?

Hooper

You bet. Well, I was born in Shreveport, Louisiana, and lived there until
I was ten. Moved to Tulsa, there for two years, moved to Oklahoma
City. When I was in the professional workforce I went back to Tulsa for
a while, but, bottom line, Shreveport. My dad got an opportunity to
come to work for State Farm in Oklahoma, and we came. I still have
family in Shreveport, but I definitely love Oklahoma more.

Gill

How old were you, Rhonda, when you moved to Oklahoma City?

Hooper

Twelve.

4

Gill

So you went through junior high and high school.

Hooper

Junior high, high school, and then…

Gill

What school was that, here?

Hooper

I went to John Marshall.

Gill

John Marshall.

Hooper

Yes. Back in my day, John Marshall had, I think there were eight to nine
hundred in my graduating class, and I was valedictorian. They needed
somebody to be valedictorian. I guess I got the position. It was a great
experience, but there were over two thousand in our high school, so
coming to a university was still a big deal, a big change in the number of
people and a little intimidating.

Gill

Rhonda, first of all let me back up and ask, were there some values,
some principles you learned within your family or while you were
growing up that helped influence your success later in life?

Hooper

Probably a strong work ethic from both my father and my mother. My
father was very gifted in that anything he ever read, he could remember.
Y’all would’ve hit it off big time because he could read something and
he would remember it. (Laughter) He knew dates in history and what
happened. It was amazing. My father was so smart that he also didn’t
use it to his advantage, but I learned from that. I saw what he was
capable of and didn’t do. Then I saw what my mother was very smart in
doing and how she had a job here and there, but what she did, she was
excellent at. I just saw both of them come from not such great
backgrounds, from the standpoint they weren’t entitled or given
anything. They earned it. That instilled in me the same kind of mindset.

Gill

Is there a story about how you got to Oklahoma State University?

Hooper

Yes. (Laughs) Actually, everybody thinks I’m an idiot for doing this, but
I can’t help it. I was actually accepted to Harvard, and my boyfriend,
who I had been dating for many a year, he went to Harvard. I realized I
couldn’t keep up with the Joneses, if you will, so I decided I wanted to
stay closer to home, and I checked out Louisiana State, which is where
my sister went. I didn’t like the fact that it rained every day at four
o’clock. We had been in Oklahoma, so I felt more partial to Oklahoma.
My parents said I could go anywhere in the United States except OU.
(Laughter)

Gill

Well, I see that started early in life! (Laughter)

5

Hooper

Yes, that started early in life. (Laughs) Bottom line, I thought, “Well, I’ll
just go to OSU for the first year, and then I’ll go and do something
beyond,” and I fell in love with OSU and didn’t want to leave. But, no,
the thing with Harvard was really cool. I had lots of opportunities and
got to meet a lot of people, but my family was not able to really afford
that environment, and I made that decision on my own.

Gill

Was it a tough decision for you?

Hooper

Not really because I had been around them enough to realize that wasn’t
me and just because—I went to some classes at Harvard and everything
else, and I thought, “They’re basically the same as what we have here.”
It was just the tradition and the cachet. To me, your pedigree is just your
pedigree. It’s who you are inside that makes a difference.

Gill

Rhonda, what year did you enroll at Oklahoma State, fall of…

Hooper

Nineteen seventy-four, fall of ’74.

Gill

Your major?

Hooper

My major, first, was art. I was an art major. I took some classes. You
had to take all of your prerequisites and so on, but I did take a lot of art
classes at the time. Those art classes required a lot of drawing,
obviously, and I realized that drawing nudes was not my cup of tea.
(Laughter) I was like, “This is um…” There were some very talented
people in those classes, and I was talented, but I thought, “Now, how am
I going to make money?” So I backed off that, and I switched my major
my freshman year. Second semester, I went into journalism with
emphasis in advertising. I didn’t have a minor because they didn’t
recognize minors then, so marketing was my second. But I had a lot of
hours of science. I was major into science.

Gill

Rhonda, kind of looking back, you’ve been very successful in your
career in marketing, advertising, etcetera. Did you know at that time
that that’s what you wanted to do? You were pretty sure. Where did that
come from?

Hooper

What spawned it is that advertising allowed creativity to happen. I had
always been one of those that is always thinking of different things. I
used to capture it on paper with my work, but then I realized I had the
capability to think creatively as well, so it sounded like a cool
profession. I think I was influenced early on by Bewitched and watching
Darrin [Stephens]. (Laughter) It seemed like a really interesting and
fulfilling approach to always getting to touch new things and make

6

things happen. I’m not a rote-type person. If you made me sit and
produce documents all day, I’d go stark raving mad. I have to be out
there, so I think the reason I picked this—and I am not an impulsive
person by any means. I do have a process of evaluating things, but the
one thing I was impulsive about was picking my major.
I was influenced by somebody that we were doing—it was
Homecoming. So, see? The Homecoming influenced me my freshman
year, and we were doing the Homecoming sign, the “Welcome Back,
Alumni.” I was in a sorority. I had just pledged, and I think we were
doing it with Phi Taus. The guy that—he and I were doing the sign. We
were talking amongst doing all this. He was an advertising major, and I
thought, “Well, that sounds really cool.” Well, that’s what influenced me
is his verbatims about that. It was like, “I can’t believe I did that,” but at
the same time, as I got into it, I—and that, punctuated by Dr. Manzer,
Dr. Lee Manzer. He is amazing. In consumer behavior, I took one of his
classes, and I was inspired. I thought, “This is what I need to do.” That,
coupled with the business side of it, is what influenced me.
Gill

You mentioned Dr. Manzer. Were there other faculty or staff that
influenced you in your development as a student?

Hooper

There were. As far as pinpointing who they were, I can’t remember all
their names. I was one of those that sat on the front row or second to the
front row, and I participated. That’s just who I am. I still do that. I have a
tendency to get right up there. Why be in the back and be wallpaper? If
you don’t take it seriously, there’s no point, so I had a lot of people
influence me. Dr. Wisherd, Sheila Wisherd, was my counselor, and she
was influential on the AAF, the American Advertising Federation
competition that we do. OSU is a participant. She really gave me a sense
of confidence and exposed me to the business sides of things in her field.
She was very special to me, too. I’m not sure if she—she had cancer
several years ago so, I’m not sure of her status. I never have talked to her
since graduating, but she was a very dear person.

Gill

Can you share some information about your undergraduate activities,
organizations, things you were involved in?

Hooper

Well, the counsel I got when I first pledged was…

Gill

The sorority you pledged?

Hooper

Delta Delta Delta, and they encouraged us to get involved on campus.
Well, don’t challenge me because I’ll take it to the monty, and I
basically went all out. I was involved in a lot of different things. Some of
the more significant, I was on the executive committee of Homecoming.

7

I was in Mortar Board. I was Arts and Science’s student senator. Let’s
see. Lots of different things I got involved in. Ultimately I was a
Redskin Congratulate when we had a yearbook, which I hate that we
don’t have a yearbook now because, I tell you what, digital is one thing,
but being able to pick up and share memories is more critical. So I was
involved in that. I was a Top Ten senior. Lots of different things I was
involved in. Then as far as the sorority, I was an officer in several
different levels. I honestly can’t remember everything.
Gill

That’s great.

Hooper

I know it was so much so that when I graduated I said, “I’m taking a
hiatus on activities for a while.”

Gill

Rhonda, what year did you graduate?

Hooper

Nineteen seventy-eight.

Gill

Seventy-eight. Could you share briefly some highlights of your
professional career since you left Oklahoma State University?

Hooper

Okay. After I left, I did take a period of time to chill out. (Laughs) I
decided I wasn’t going to actively pursue getting in a job market. I had a
job that I was making a lot of money at, and that was bartending.
(Laughter)

Gill

Where was that?

Hooper

It was a small little bar called Bonaparte’s in Shepherd Mall. This bar,
we catered to OCU law students. I think we had six tables and eighteen
bar chairs, but back in the late ’70s I was making $200 a night, which
was a lot of money.

Gill

Basically out of tips?

Hooper

Yes. It was quite a bit of money, and it was hard for me to think,
(Laughter) “Okay, I’m going to give this up and go to…” which was
low-paying. I think my first job, I think I made $800 a month. So, I
mean, $200 a night, $800 a month! (Laughs) Okay. I couldn’t have done
both because I worked long hours. I did that for a few months, and then I
entered the job-seeking market in the fall. So while everybody else was
zigging, I zagged, meaning I had a different entry point, which basically
—my second interview I was offered a position and went to work for
Ackerman McQueen here in Oklahoma City.

Gill

Which is one of the top advertising agencies.

8

Hooper

Yes. The two leading advertising agencies in Oklahoma are Ackerman
McQueen and Jordan Associates. I looked at going out of state. I had
thought about going to Denver to be a ski bum, to ski and to work and
everything else and realized I couldn’t afford to live there. Hey, you
know, fresh out of college, you’re twenty-one, twenty-two, going to go
have fun, too, but I realized I needed to have a roommate. I didn’t have
the resources at that point to do it, so I decided to stay close to home,
again, and went to work for Ackerman in the creative department. I was
a copywriter and then went from copywriting to the creative director’s
assistant. From creative director’s assistant to traffic manager, from
traffic manager to AE, account executive in the Oklahoma City office,
then Tulsa, then back to Oklahoma City, and I did that all in three years.
I worked seven days a week, and I said three years or twenty-one in dog
years. (Laughter) I mean, it was long hours, but it was rewarding for me
at the same time. But, yes, at the ripe old age of twenty-four, one of my
accounts was the National Rifle Association, so I was going to
Washington DC very often. I was playing with the big boys. It was
pretty fulfilling, but at the same time, there was more to life. I moved on,
so I went on to the client’s side. I was director of advertising for
Technical Oil Tool Corporation (TOTCO), which was a Baker
International company. We had over 2,500 employees in offices all over
the US. I was one of the only female managers.

Gill

Baker is an oil tool company?

Hooper

Baker is an oil tool company. Why I went to that, I like mechanical
reasoning. I like technical stuff. I get into it, so I thought, “Well, why
not?” I enjoyed it. I worked there a little over four years. I wasn’t
looking to change when Jordan came after me, but I enjoyed it. I loved
being in the business. The guys, at first, were resistant to me, but I had to
win them over. I had to work with engineers and with sales force and
manufacturing, and I learned diplomacy. I learned you can’t be heavyhanded or they’ll ax you. I learned there’s more to life than marketing,
and just because marketing needs, it doesn’t mean everybody else is
going to be on the same page. It was cool.
We were, like, third when I came to work at TOTCO, and we became
number one through a focus on the brand, through doing the right things
to market. When we went to trade shows, we had a professional
demeanor. We knew our stuff. We had rules when people would come to
the booth and how they had to behave because when I first came
onboard, the guys were sitting in chairs, smoking at a trade show, and I
was like, “No!” (Laughs) I made them wear matching blazers, the whole
bit, and it was amazing. They resisted, but then ultimately it worked, and

9

they were going, “Okay.” So I earned their respect. We just had a
twenty-something-year reunion of TOTCO, and it was awesome. We
built a strong bond there, and the employees were fabulous.
Gill

Then you moved to Jordan?

Hooper

Then Jordan reached out, and it took five interviews for them to
convince me to come over because my reference point was, “No! No
agency!” It was the right move, and I came to work at Jordan.

Gill

What year was it?

Hooper

Eighty-six.

Gill

Eighty-six, and you’ve been with them ever since.

Hooper

Yes, since then. I had the opportunity to work on Cellular One. Jordan
Associates actually introduced cellular phones.

Gill

Ah!

Hooper

Yes. I worked in seventeen markets for Cellular One, and I was an
account coordinator, I think, when I started. That was really cool. Now, I
mean—the cellular phones when we launched were those huge old
boxes, and now they’re the tiny little microchip, at this point. That was a
neat experience. Then worked on a lot of the government business. At
the time, [Henry] Bellmon was the governor of Oklahoma. [Warren]
Doc Jordan, the founder of Jordan Associates, he’s the one that helped
get Bellmon elected the first time, then the senate, and then the second
time, so he had me on that business. I worked on the Oklahoma
Turnpike Authority and the Department of Commerce and did the
“Don’t Lay That Trash On Oklahoma” campaign and a lot of those
different things. It was a good experience. Then went from that arena to
—our president of the agency, Jeanette Gamba, said, “Would you like to
lead the Hardee’s business?” Hardee’s Food Systems, quick-service
restaurants, and I jumped on it. We grew that business from what started
as only a statewide basis to the point when we worked for them for
twenty-one years. When they left the agency a few years ago, we had
twenty-five states, and it was major, seven-figure piece of business. I
loved being in the quick-service restaurant business. I get bored easily,
Jerry, as you know, and so if it’s not broken, I will break it and have
something to work on. I like diversity of client base, and today I get to
touch every piece of business to some extent.

Gill

And, of course, today, you’re president and CEO [Chief Executive
Officer].

10

Hooper

I have been president and CEO for four years.

Gill

I think your business made the second largest advertising marketing
firm in the state.

Hooper

Yes. We represent a diverse base of clients, and I get to do a lot of it. I
have a great team. It’s really the team. I mean, I’m not as much handson. I’m more in strategic planning, strategic direction of client
initiatives. When I’m not doing that, I’m involved in a lot of boards. I
enjoy that, but at the same time I’m saying no to everything right now.
(Laughs) There’s a point of maxing out.

Gill

Rhonda, I know there’s a lot of recognition that you’ve received through
the years professionally. Are there some that have been more
meaningful than others? Could you mention some that you’ve received
personally that have been meaningful to you?

Hooper

I’d say, personally, what meant the most to me was being a distinguished
alumnus at OSU. I’m tearing up because I’m looking at you, and that
meant a lot, and you were my host. It was neat. It was very neat. It so
happened that I’ve done different things. I’ve been recognized, and it
means something, but I think that meant the most.
I think that meant the most. It was very special, and I didn’t know OSU
was so special until later in life. We take it for granted while we’re in
school, and it’s later that you see different life experiences and then you
see the commitment. I’m impressed with the commitment that OSU
leaders have. I say OSU leaders. I’m talking about volunteer leaders. I’m
talking about those who work for the university, and that’s why I chose
early on to get involved in the Alumni Association. I attribute this to
Kirk Jewell. Kirk Jewell and Marsha Wooden on a local chapter level
asked me to come aboard on the Oklahoma County chapter.

Gill

Rhonda, could you take a minute because you started the Oklahoma
County chapter before you moved to the national level. Could you talk
about some of the things, the years, the activities that you had the
chapter and things involved in it? This would’ve been what years?

Hooper

Oh, gosh, Jerry. What years? I don’t know. It was back—it was in the
’90s. It was probably mid- to latter part of the ’90s. Oh, it’d be about
’95, ’96, maybe. I got involved on the county level, and I went to several
meetings and saw what we could do. Early on, our county decided to
create a program for seniors. We had been doing the Honors Banquets,
and we needed to reengineer, and so we came up with our own program.
I think at one year, we had leading students come to Frontier City, and
we had a big recruitment effort. It was more of a scene. It had lots of

11

activities and lots of things, and it was an interchange. We had financial
aid and some other things that were more meaningful versus less stodgy.
Not to be bad about previous, but they were more regimented. It was
time for change. The county did a lot of that. We were a very close-knit
group. We heard what was going on from the Stillwater needs, and then
we would figure out how to make it happen. Oklahoma County, at the
time, was the leading chapter. I think now it’s competitive. Tulsa is
really doing very well.
Gill

You were chapter president?

Hooper

Then I became chapter president. I told—actually, my comment to
Marsha, (I think it was Marsha) I said, “I’ll get involved as long as I
don’t have to be the leader.” (Laughter) Kirk and Marsha still give me
grief about that. Then I went from county to being on the association
board. That’s when we had seventy-nine members of the board, I
believe. Wasn’t it? How many?

Gill

That’s about right.

Hooper

So it was a huge, huge group, but it was very—I loved every aspect of it.
Then went on to the executive committee, and we were very close. We
worked hard together. We were innovative, but we wouldn’t have had
the passion had it not been for the leadership of the Alumni Association
and, Jerry, you and Larry [Shell], fabulous team. You had a good group
of people working with you. Y’all gave us the parameters, and we just
took it.

Gill

Let’s talk about some of the parameters.

Hooper

Okay. (Laughs)

Gill

I recall some of them, but I want to hear you talk about them. First of
all, the years you went onto the board was somewhere around mid-’90s
for the national board, and then you were president…

Hooper

In 2001, 2002.

Gill

So you had about six, eight years. During that time, there were several
things that you did. First of all, I’d like to talk about some of the
members of your leadership team who were on the board with you, and
other officers. What names do you think of when you think of your time
there?

Hooper

I have a memory span that is not very long.

12

Gill

There was Kathy [Laster]…

Hooper

Kathy, well, Kathy was president two terms prior. Gene Batchelder, Sam
Combs, Clayton Taylor, Leo Presley, Ronda McKown—oh, shoot, Ditch
Witch, out in California…

Gill

Rogers, Paul Rogers.

Hooper

Paul Rogers, yes. Oh, man, there’s quite a few. I would have to look
back at my notes. I didn’t get your questions ahead of time, so this is all
spur of the moment. Our group was really cool and from all different
walks of life, but we all shared the same foundation of knowledge, and
that’s what we pulled together to make happen.

Gill

Do you remember—I can think of two events of strategic planning that I
think you were president right towards the end of that, right?

Hooper

Yes.

Gill

First of all, I just want to ask you, do you remember, coming aboard,
what were some of the challenges, some of the opportunities that you
recall at that time?

Hooper

Well, the challenges were (and they still are challenges) there was an
over proliferation of communication when you’re an alumnus. An
alumnus that is not involved doesn’t understand the difference between
athletics, the Foundation, the Alumni Association, their respective
college, or blah, blah, blah. It’s all competing, and so one of the things
that we did in the strategic planning was, “What’s the voice of the
Alumni Association? What’s our position in this communications link?”
Our intent was to get a voice, and ours was, “We are the voice of the
alumni,” and that’s where we landed. We had always been. We just
framed it. We have the ability to reconnect alumni to their university, so
we came up and Randy Wedel. Randy was part of this. We broke out
into…

Gill

Paul Schulte.

Hooper

Paul Schulte, duh! How could I—okay, sorry, Paul. Sorry, Randy. We
broke into creative visioning, and it was Randy and I. We came in on the
Connections for Life theme line. It was like, “Yes! This is it!” It
incorporated all of the people that participated in the strategic planning
session.

Gill

Can you talk a little bit about that, because that, in a lot of ways,
changed the Alumni Association. What year was this? It was about a

13

year long, nearly a couple years.
Hooper

It was ’99. I think ’98, ’99, and our continuum was from diapers to
Depends. (Laughter) It was like, “How do we get alumni involved to the
point that their legacies would feel part of OSU?” and then, “How do we
stay with them over all their life stages to the point of Depends?”
(Laughs)

Gill

So the overarching priority, then, was that Connections for Life theme,
communications…

Hooper

And in Stillwater, but the Alumni Association should be where the
Alumni are. It doesn’t matter if you’re in Dallas or if you’re in Istanbul.
The Alumni Association should have relevance and connectivity to you
as an alumnus. So the strategic planning process, we did research. We
had visioning, creative visioning exercises. From all this data and from
the compilation of research, I took that and basically did the marketing
plan, if you will. Then, “How do we roll this out? How do we embrace
it? How do we become and raise our significance so that graduates from
OSU would want to be a member of the Alumni Association?” Then,
“What is the Alumni Association’s stature at OSU, and how do we make
sure that we are always heard and that we are not passed under the rug?”
Not that anybody would, but it was important for the Alumni
Association.

Gill

As I recall, Rhonda, you took some of those themes into your year as
president, which was a couple years later. Just thinking out loud, you
have, certainly, the professional expertise in all your years in marketing
and advertising, in the business, and in branding. It seems, as I recall,
the Alumni Association strategic planning during your tenure on the
board, especially your year as national president, used your skill sets
and honesty to positively influence the image, branding the image, the
direction of it, the communication, the voice. Do you want to speak to
some of those things because we talked about electronic
communications, websites, and etcetera?

Hooper

That’s how, actually, the Orange Connections website came to fruition
and then the online store so that orange could be purchased wherever
you were, and there were different initiatives that spun out of it. I
worked with the staff, and we said, “All right, this is what we want to
accomplish from a positioning of the brand from the Alumni
Association.” We had meetings with the staff, and then they brought it to
life, be it in print, be it in direct marketing, through recruitment efforts.
The whole legacy program came from this concept. The orange ball
sticker had always been, but it further reinforced our deference of that
orange ball and why people would want to have the orange ball. Yes, the

14

legacy program, we created that.
Gill

That diapers, Depends?

Hooper

It was the diapers, the—yes.

Gill

The diaper stage of it.

Hooper

Yes, starting the diapers. These were innovative ideas to the point that it
was recognized nationally by CASE [Council for Advancement and
Support of Education], and OU was trying to copy a lot of our ideas. It
was leading the pack, and we had done a good job of evaluating what
other best practices of Alumni Associations were doing and how could
we do a better job. No one had done this, so we were carving new paths,
and it was awesome. The Alumni Association (this was prior to the
building of the building) to most people, the Alumni Association was
that window in the Student Union, and that was it. So our key was how
do we take that window and position it with the right relevant products,
more so than just discounts at Stillwater merchants. What does that
mean, and then how does that position us that we then built a building?
More people now know that Homecoming is brought because of the
Alumni Association.

Gill

And the building helped.

Hooper

The building helped. It provided the bricks and mortar and the evidence
of this organization, so all of it tied together. I feel good about what
efforts we did in those strategic planning sessions. I remember going to
Guthrie, and we were—remember that? We had these retreats, and we
were questioning everything, and “How do we do things better?” That
was the springboard to cool things.

Gill

Let me pick up on that, Rhonda. From your perspective, after the
strategic planning and implementations in the following two, three, or
four years, how was the Alumni Association different as an
organization, coming out of this continued planning, than it was before?

Hooper

Confident, understood where it was going, and had a plan to get there.
Yes, strategic planning does that, but I think beyond that, it framed a
skeleton of just business terms, and it personified, truly, what the
importance of an alumnus is, that an OSU alumnus is different than any
other alum. If you put a Cowboy alum, compared to, oh, let’s just pick
A&M. I won’t pick somebody closer. (Laughter) We carry ourselves
differently. We have a sense of humility, but yet we’re effective. You
don’t have to be boisterous and loud-mouthed and obnoxious to make a
difference. I’d say that we captured all those personality traits and what

15

truly makes us special as part of this plan. It even became evident in how
the design of the Alumni Center ended up. It was evident in its décor and
its furnishings. Today’s Alumni Center personifies the integrity and just
that you really like this person. When you walk in the Alumni Center,
it’s a very friendly, approachable, yet smart…
Gill

Functional.

Hooper

…and functional. So all that planning—see? It even went to that, and
today I think it’s prevalent on membership. I know we need to grow
membership again. I mean, there’s a trend with a lot of people not
wanting to belong to things, but you drive around, you see those round,
orange ball stickers, and it’s your automatic like of that individual
because we have something in common, and it’s the university.

Gill

Quickly, just kind of touching on this, you mentioned a little bit about
some of the outcomes in the strategic planning. I think the Alumni
Center—you spent several hours on committees looking at furniture and
design, did a program study of what we wanted to do, how it needed to
function, and, of course, programming. I want to give you credit. You
spent a lot of hours on just, I mean, stuff that’s important to me, but like
picking out furniture, furnishings, décor, paintings, location, and you
must feel good about that because—did it come out as you hoped it
would?

Hooper

It did, it really did. And Jerry, there were four of us: you, Larry, Clayton,
and I. I was your female balance. (Laughs) It’s like, “Okay, guys!”

Gill

No, no, no.

Hooper

What was cool is we aren’t interior designers, but it captured the essence
of the brand that we wanted it to, and it has the right amount of cowboy
with class. I mean, not that cowboys aren’t classy. It’s classy cowboy,
okay? I am very impressed. I remember us sitting through all those
swatches, and, “Do we do this?” “Do we do that?” and it’s like, [groans],
but it was good.

Gill

Rhonda, somewhat of a broader, philosophical question, if we can, in
your opinion, why is it important for alumni to remain engaged with
their alumni association?

Hooper

To remain engaged, or to even get involved in the first place?

Gill

To get involved, period, to at some point connect. Why is it important to
be—could you have a strong university? Could you have a strong
alumni association without the involvement?

16

Hooper

No.

Gill

What’s your opinion about that?

Hooper

A university is only as good as its alumni. If you’re just granting degrees
and things like that, unless there’s engagement, it’s just another
university. What separates it is the people behind it. It’s important for
alumni to be a part of it. Just graduating isn’t enough. You need to
maintain a level of communication and understanding. I wasn’t involved
in the Alumni Association for several years. It took, what, twenty years
or fifteen years before I started having an interest, but the more I got
exposed, the more I saw the passion and the smarts pulling together. It
made me excited, and I thought, “This is a place that we need to be
involved.” So it’s important for alumni to be part of the association.
It’s very inexpensive. I mean, it’s $45 a year. It’s $700, I think, for a
lifetime membership. In the scheme of things, that’s no big deal, but yet
it fosters things for scholarships. You understand all things OSU, and
then you choose where you want to be involved: at all, or nothing, or
you want to just be a silent partner. What most people think, I mean,
probably a lot of people think, is athletics when they think of the
university. As an alum, it’s so much more. We wouldn’t have the caliber
of the faculty, we wouldn’t have the caliber of our president, unless we
had engaged alumni.

Gill

Can I pick up with that, your engagement motif? What are the legitimate
roles of alumni in supporting their university? What kinds of things
should the Alumni Association be engaging alumni in, in your opinion?
How should they be helping the university?

Hooper

Well, I think they need to—the Alumni Association is probably most
effective in raising a constituency of knowledgeable alumni, so, friendraising, if you will. Friend-raising from the standpoint that once you are
involved, then you can choose to be more involved. It’s not about just
giving money, okay? That’s one component, if anything, but not
everybody is capable of giving money. People want to give their talent.
They want to give if they have some time. They want to give an
opportunity if they feel they could help a student coming through. There
are so many levels of engagement. The key is to letting that individual
have the choice and giving them that open door. Our job is to connect, is
to be the gateway of alumni to the university. Then, depending upon
how far they want to get in that gateway, it’s up to them.

Gill

We use the terms “ambassadors for OSU,” “advocates for OSU.”

17

Hooper

Absolutely, ambassadors. It’s the intrinsic aspects. You see people
proudly—in fact, when I was Christmas shopping Saturday and Sunday,
I saw OSU outfits all over the place, and I’m like, “Yes!” It was up to
the alumni to put the best face forward. It’s expected of those who are
employed by OSU, but to the general populous, to people that are out
there, they’re our ambassadors. The more that they can help from a
recruitment standpoint, they understand—somebody’s child is
investigating different universities, I’m the first to go, “Let me get you a
tour at OSU. Let me…” Those systems are in place at OSU. I can make
a call, and it happens, and that’s amazing. My job is to help fuel future
graduates as much as it is past graduates.

Gill

You’ve alluded a couple times to the relationship to the university. How
do you feel about the current organizational structure of the Alumni
Association and its relationship with the university?

Hooper

I’m probably not as voiced on what it is currently because having been
president in 2002, I’m still involved on Leadership Council, but I’m not
as in a frontal position. I think us being self-governing, I think that has
been a good thing. I think the standpoint of its significance is there. It’s
regarded well with the university. I’m impressed with President [Burns]
Hargis’ approach to things and how he is doing a good balance of talent.
I think as far as how the Alumni Association is structured, it’s definitely
more effective than it was with seventy-nine, eighty-something board
members, but yet at the same time, being on the Leadership Council, I
don’t feel as…

Gill

Invested?

Hooper

…invested, yes, as invested as I did. But I’m saying that just because my
time has been, not that it’s current.

Gill

Rhonda, you were talking a little bit about the mission of the Alumni
Association. Can you share your thoughts on the mission of the Alumni
Association and its relationship with the Foundation, with athletics?
You alluded to this a little bit earlier, about how they work together.
Your thoughts on that?

Hooper

I think before we went through the strategic planning, before we
identified who we were, I think we were lost. We were lost. I think now
our counterparts respect us, and there’s more working relationships with
each other. The three-legged stool, if you will, athletics, the Foundation,
the Alumni Association, each one has a mission, but they’re all
contingent upon each other. They need to be separated as far as their
respective roles, but together they are the focal point of how alumni get
reengaged.

18

Gill

You feel that each one of them has a different mission…

Hooper

Yes.

Gill

…that’s unique and different and can be maintained separately.

Hooper

Absolutely. They should maintain separate because that way each
mission is effectively tracked and performed, performance-based,
otherwise, some things might give to the other. But I think the three
being the three-legged stool, to me, is the most effective. From all the
things that I did in terms of looking at best practices, in terms of us
moving to self-governing, there were reasons we did what we did, and
they were good decisions. Now, it has made it more difficult from a
revenue-generation standpoint and some other things, but it needed to be
more difficult.

Gill

Generally, how do you feel about the future of the Alumni Association?

Hooper

I think the future of the Alumni Association is very good. You know
how I feel about you, Jerry. I think you did an awesome job, and I think
Larry Shell does an awesome job. I think the future, going forward, I see
that Larry has put into place the right people. What he needs now is
more revenue opportunities, and then get out of the way. Get out of the
way. It’s going to happen. I feel very strongly about the Alumni
Association. I think the only thing is to always—it needs to have its
place. It needs to have its leg, and it doesn’t need to be messed with.
(Laughs) Okay?

Gill

Special memories about all your times with the Alumni Association and
your work, I think there would be a lot of good memories, but are there
some special ones that just jump out at you?

Hooper

From the Alumni Association?

Gill

Yes.

Hooper

Oh, man! There’s a bunch. I think Camp Cowboy was awesome, when
we went through Camp Cowboy, when we took our whole board and did
that. Remember? That was pretty fun. When we did Camp Cowboy for
incoming freshmen, I got to speak several times. Loved doing that
around the campfire. In fact, one year it was pitch black, and Coach
Miles was speaking, Les Miles. He and I had to go out to the campfire in
the pitch black. His son (I can’t remember his name, the little one) had
the flashlight, and he was shining it up or down. It wasn’t straight. So he
kept going, “Put it out in the front!” because we were just through all the

19

weeds or whatever, and none of the kids had come to the campfire yet.
We were trying to find our way. I thought, “Great. This is fun.” That was
a lot of fun. The Alumni Association, getting everybody fired up at the
—I remember the Cotton Bowl and the Alamo Bowl. I can’t believe
we’re going to the Alamo Bowl again. I think we were a much better
team than we were back then. Just the bowl games and getting people
together. Love the creative visioning that we did. Love getting in the
room and hashing things out. There were a lot of special memories. It’s
just hard to pinpoint.
Gill

Let me ask you this, Rhonda. All the time and energy that you put into
your leadership roles when you had very hectic eighteen-hour days and
this kind of thing, yet you put a lot of time and energy and passion into
that, where did that passion come from? Why were you willing to give so
much, Rhonda?

Hooper

I don’t know where it comes from, other than the fact that I think I came
out of the womb like that because my mom and dad would counsel me. I
always had a strong work ethic, and they kept saying, “You do too
much. You do too much.” I mean, if I had an art project in grade school,
I would always go above and beyond. My mother would keep saying,
“You’re going to burn yourself out. Quit doing that.” Well, I’m still not
burning myself out, but I might be if I don’t… (Laughs) Where do I
have the passion, if I believe in something?

Gill

Why OSU? I mean, you could’ve given it to a lot of other places.

Hooper

Because I believed in its leadership, truly. Once I saw efforts and I saw
how real people were, I thought, “This is cool, and this is going to help
other people. This is going to help students. It’s going to be the bridge
between young and old.” I got passionate, and the passion just went for
it. When I was president, I was working long hours, and it was also one
of the worst times in history for Jordan Associates. One of our associates
was murdered by his estranged wife and her boyfriend. Then we lost two
of our largest accounts, days apart, so I was dealing with a lot of this. I
wasn’t CEO. I was EVP [Executive Vice President] at the time. I was
dealing with a lot of this, work-wise, and I was doing Alumni
Association every other hour. It was a tough time, but I wasn’t going to
let it be obvious. You just keep plugging away, and if your heart’s in the
right place, things will work out. My heart was in the right place because
I felt the Alumni Association’s heart was in the right place. The
motivations were there, the sense of ethics, the—I just liked the people.
And because of that, that’s why I got focused on it. It’s been hard to
replace. Of all the things I’ve done since, nothing’s as special in my
heart.

20

Gill

A couple quick questions. You have given time to other things. Just
briefly, can you share some of the organizations that you—in two hours’
time? (Laughter)

Hooper

I am on the executive committee of the Oklahoma City Chamber. I’m
chairman of the Oklahoma City Convention and Visitors Commission
[Bureau]. I’m on the Oklahoma City Economic Development Trust, the
Oklahoma Center for Advancement of Science and Technology. I’m on
the executive committee of the Oklahoma City National Memorial and
Museum, executive committee of Oklahoma Business Roundtable. I am
chair-elect of Leadership Oklahoma. I am on the Board of the Oklahoma
City Boathouse Foundation. That’s a handful.

Gill

You’ve worn me out already.

Hooper

I’m a handful. I counted seventeen boards or committees or special
initiatives at one point, and I was like, “What am I doing?”

Gill

You’ve been in Leadership Oklahoma.

Hooper

Leadership Oklahoma, yes. In fact, I’m chair-elect. I’ve been doing
strategic planning for that. I take over this summer, and that’s an
organization of about 1,400 people. It’s pretty cool. But, let’s see. I
know there’s a bunch more things I’m doing, and I apologize. If I
haven’t had meetings recently, I don’t remember them all.

Gill

Kind of putting one there I meant to ask you earlier, tell me about how
you feel about Kathy Laster.

Hooper

What do I think about Kathy? I think Kathy’s awesome.

Gill

Kathy helped lead this strategic planning.

Hooper

She did. In fact, she was critical to the visioning process. Kathy is a very
passionate person, too. They could put Kathy and me in a room and all
—yes. (Laughs) She’s fantastic. We had some good people, but Kathy in
particular—I mean, when you’re willing to put your heart and soul into
something, it’s obvious. That infuses a lot of engagement, if it’s smart
infusion of heart and soul, if you will. There’s lots of heart and soul that
can be off on a tangent, but I think that was critical.

Gill

Let me close with this question. This is a serious question, Rhonda. How
do you hope people will remember Rhonda Hooper?

Hooper

Oh, shoot. Gosh! I haven’t been asked that question.

21

Gill

We’re not ready to write your obituary yet, but…

Hooper

I was going to say, “Am I going somewhere?” (Laughter) Because, I tell
you, I feel like today I’m going somewhere! (Laughs) Oh, shoot. I think,
“Remember the person that challenged the status quo and didn’t know
the term ‘No’ and just figured out how to make it happen, and had the
intestinal fortitude and the dynamics to get people involved to make a
difference.” How do you want to be remembered? Not that you’re going
anywhere, either. (Laughs)

Gill

This interview is for you. Anything we’ve failed to cover, things that
were important to mention?

Hooper

Did I answer all the questions you had?

Gill

You got an A on every one of them. (Laughter)

Hooper

Good.

Gill

You’re a valedictorian again! (Laughter)

Hooper

I think that was very comprehensive. I think what you’re doing for the
Library is really awesome. No better person to do that than you. Jerry
Gill remembers—it’s like, “Got to show you all these things.” I mean,
you’re a historian at heart, and you were a historian in everything you
did at the Alumni Association. That pays off, obviously. I guess I would
sum up that OSU means a lot to me. It’s not just winning on the field.
It’s winning in every aspect. I want OSU to be the leading institution in
this state and leading other institutions on a national level. It’s because
we do things in a smarter and more dynamic way. It’s not about just
taking the easy way out. It’s always challenging.

Gill

We hit that sixty-minute mark.

Hooper

Okay.
------- End of interview -------

22

