Sonya Terpening
Oral History Interview
Interviewed by Julie Pearson-Little Thunder
January 6, 2012
Stillwater, Oklahoma
Little Thunder

This is Julie Pearson-Little Thunder. Today is January 6, 2012. I’m at
Oklahoma State University in Stillwater with Sonya Terpening. Sonya,
you’re an award-winning western painter. You’ve lived in Texas many
years, but you have lots of Oklahoma connections, including attending
OSU. You’ve brought in a piece that was commissioned for installation
here at the Library, and you’ve got an upcoming show scheduled here in
Stillwater on January 9. Welcome back to Stillwater.

Terpening

Thank you. Thank you very much.

Little Thunder

Where were you born, and where did you grow up?

Terpening

I was born in Frankfort, Michigan. My parents lived in a little town
there. My dad was in the service at the time. Lived there a few months
before we moved. From then on, I moved about every six months to a
year until I was in the middle of, well, beginning of seventh grade, I
think. I never finished the same year in the same school, ever. One year,
I think we had three different schools, so traveled a lot, traveled a lot.
(Laughs) When I was in seventh grade, we were in Texas, in the Dallas
area, in Irving, Texas. We lived there until the middle of my junior year,
when we moved to Oklahoma, and I graduated high school in
Claremore, Oklahoma, well, actually Sequoyah, just outside Claremore.

Little Thunder

What did your mom and dad do for a living?

Terpening

Mom was a housewife. When we moved so much, he installed radars for
GE on service bases. He was a military contractor. When we moved to
Dallas, he worked with, I believe, Honeywell at that time, and he was in
the computer department with that. He developed and maintained

4

computers.
Little Thunder

You were fairly close to your grandfather, or your grandparents. Did
your grandfather have a ranch here in Oklahoma?

Terpening

No, actually, it was in Kansas. It was the original homestead that my
great-great uncles got after serving the Civil War. They came down from
Canada and stayed there, so that was where the ranch was. Just after the
Depression, they put it into wheat, and a lot of the land was fallow. He
didn’t have a lot of cows at the time, didn’t really work it as a ranch. My
uncle took it over, and it became a dairy farm. We used to go every
summer there to help with harvest and spend the summers on the ranch.

Little Thunder

Did he have a few horses?

Terpening

He had one old plug of a horse, an old farm horse that I thought was the
most beautiful horse in the world, and I would ride for hours on end. I
think it just walked around the pasture, but it was my dream of a horse. I
wanted a horse my whole life, and Dad said that he would get me a horse
when we finally moved somewhere where we could keep one. Of
course, we moved every six months, every year, something like that, so I
waited and waited. When I was a junior in high school we moved to
Claremore, and Dad said, “I promised you your horse,” and within two
weeks of us moving there, he went out and we bought an Appaloosa
mare that was my love. Then I went away to college. Came to OSU to
college a year and a half later, and my sister got the advantage of having
the horse. I think they bred her, and they ended up with four or five
horses at the time.

Little Thunder

What’s your first memory of seeing artwork?

Terpening

I remember a sculpture when I was about nine years old, and we went to
New York City on a trip. Dad had to go there, and we were at the UN
building. I remember that being the first monumental sculpture I ever
saw. Probably my most impressive memory of seeing real art was when
Mark’s grandfather took me to the Smithsonian Museum in Washington,
DC, to the art museum there. All of the art that I had studied in books
and on slides here at OSU were suddenly right in front of me. He took
me to the gallery in front of those paintings, and he just left me. He said,
“You’ve got to experience this by yourself.” That was very important.

Little Thunder

Mark’s grandfather, so you two had already met in high school?

Terpening

Mark and I met when I was about sixteen years old. He’s a year and a
half older than I am, year older than I am. We were just good buddies for
a little while, at least in my opinion. He had other ideas. (Laughter) Our

5

first date was to an art show that I had artwork in. I had been taking
private lessons with professional artists. This was in Irving, Texas, and I
was having an art show, so he knew what he was getting into from day
one. (Laughs)
Little Thunder

How exciting! Was that the first time you had shown your work in an art
show?

Terpening

Yes, that was the first time, the first time I really took it seriously. I’d
always had oil paints and easels and canvases from the time I was about
nine years old, but that was the first time I took private lessons with a
professional and knew that you could do this for a living. Of course, I
was thinking more teaching than just painting for a living. I had wanted
to be a hairdresser, and, like I said, I was about sixteen, seventeen.
Mother said, “Take this art class first, and if you still want to go into
hairdressing, you’re old enough to go to hairdressing school and
cosmetology school.” So I took the first lesson, was terrified and hated
it, went back for the second lesson, and I was sold. I enjoyed it after that.

Little Thunder

That’s wonderful. Having those oil paints so early, obviously your folks
encouraged your interest in art.

Terpening

My grandfather was very artistic. He carved, mainly, and built things,
and he used to do sketches for me when I was a kid. My dad was very
interested in art. It was just something I didn’t realize I had an interest in
or talent in as much as my parents knew because it was something I
always did and always enjoyed doing, drawing and painting. I thought
that was what everybody did, so I was very lucky they were observant
enough to encourage that.

Little Thunder

By the time you came to OSU, though, you’d sort of had your first taste
of—did you sell anything at your show? I should’ve asked that.

Terpening

Wow, I don’t even remember. I must not have, or you think I would
have remembered that. (Laughter) I don’t think so. I think my mother
has every piece I ever painted up until yesterday. (Laughter). No, she
keeps and displays everything, even that first painting, but I don’t
remember that.

Little Thunder

But you had made up your mind by the time you got here that you
wanted a degree in art education.

Terpening

I actually didn’t. I wanted the art degree, the fine art degree, and I had a
literature minor. Mark’s dad passed away by the time we were in
college. We got married a year into college, and his dad had passed
away. His mother was very insistent that I have something that I could

6

fall back on in case anything happened because she was a very young
widow. Here I am with a literature degree and a fine art degree, going,
“Okay, you can’t get a job there, so what are we going to do?”
(Laughter) So I thought, “Okay, I’ll pick up the education.” She was a
kindergarten teacher at this time, so she was very encouraging of that. I
thought, “Okay, I’ll get my art education degree.” They waited to have
our student teaching the last semester before you graduated, and I found
out when I did my student teaching that teachers are saints, and I’m not
one. (Laughter) I am not teacher material. I knew I was going to have to
make it as an artist. I could not make it as a teacher.
Little Thunder

What were the strengths of the art program for you? What were the
things that helped you?

Terpening

This was back in ’74, ’75, something like that, and it was mostly nonobjective art at the time, abstract art, or more going into the pop art. I
always wanted to paint and draw exactly what I saw. That’s what I did
coming up. I chose OSU over OU or another school mainly because
their art was more grounded, I thought, a little more commercial, and it’s
smaller, the art department was, so I figured I could tweak it my way to
get what I needed out of the degree.
Sometimes education is wasted on the young, I guess, because it took me
a long time to realize that all this background that was so hard for me,
this abstract color design, all this background, that’s pure composition. If
art can’t hold itself on composition and color and movement and design,
it can’t hold itself up whether it’s realistic or abstract, so I got an
incredible background in color and design and composition, which I
think gives me an added strength being a realist. But it was also very
frustrating because I’m not real good at that. I’m much better at making
things look realistic, and that wasn’t really what was expected or wanted
at the time.

Little Thunder

You did go to a show at what was then the Cowboy Hall of Fame, which
was kind of a revelation for you.

Terpening

Yes. It was an incredible revelation, yes. I had actually graduated by
then when a girlfriend of mine (we lived in Bartlesville) said, “Come
with me to this show.” She went every year. At that time it was called
NAWA, National Academy of Western Artists. They would have a
three-day seminar where the artists would demonstrate. They would be
right there, and of course, then their artwork would be out.
It was the first time I had really been exposed to western art that much.
Saw fabulous realism. Kind of the only place at that time that realism
was being maintained and advanced was in the western art genre. To get

7

to meet the artists, to watch them paint, to see that you could make a
living at it, they were so encouraging. It was an incredible art
experience, incredible for me, educationally. I say I got my western art
realism degree at the Cowboy Hall.
Little Thunder

Was there one artist in particular, or something that one of the artists
said or did that just really…

Terpening

Donald Teague was a watercolor artist, and that’s a whole other story. At
the time, I was only doing watercolor and drawings. I wasn’t doing oil
painting at all. I stopped doing oil paintings—let me back up and preface
this just a little bit. When I was here at OSU, I put off taking the
watercolor class until my last two semesters, right before I did my
student teaching, because I really didn’t have any use for watercolor. It
was that other medium that you gave your children. When I had to take
it or they weren’t going to let me out of school, I fell in love with it
immediately. It was just, I made mud for six months! I don’t know why I
really liked it, but it was just a living, breathing medium. I mean, it
dripped, and it ran, and it was just so challenging. Here again, you have
to try everything. That’s why a rounded education is so good for you
because I fell in love with it. For twenty years, that’s all I ever worked
in.
Back to the Cowboy Hall, when I went there, of course I was interested
in watercolor because that’s what I was doing, and I met Donald Teague,
who was an illustrator. He’d been an illustrator for years, western art
illustrator. Did the most beautiful transparent watercolors, not opaque,
transparent watercolors and was such a kind, kind gentleman. He’s just a
special person and always remembered me. I would go back to the Hall
every year for a while to these seminars, and he always remembered me.
I had actually cut pictures of his work out of magazines when I was
younger, never knowing that I was going to meet him or that it was
watercolor, even. He was very special.

Little Thunder

You had made a decision to become a professional artist, and you’d now
taken a couple of workshops. Were you doing mall shows, small booth
shows? How were you proceeding?

Terpening

Yes, yes. Actually, the very first show I ever did was on Main Street in
Stillwater. I forget what they call it now, but they did a show where they
blocked off Main Street, and artists set up their booths. I think we had a
couple pieces of plywood or some kind of board that we hung paintings
off of, hauled them down there. They were just matted watercolors with
plastic over top of them. That was the very first show I ever did. We
would travel and do the mall shows. I think there was probably four or
five in this area, Tulsa, Oklahoma City, and all this area, sleeping in our

8

van. They were usually weekend shows. We would set up, put the work
out, and sleep in our van, and take them down. It was quite a way to get
started.
Little Thunder

On the weekends, I guess? (Laughter)

Terpening

Yes, it was on the weekends, absolutely. I think from there we kind of
progressed to the outdoor festivals. They juried those shows, and that
means you had to be pretty good, and that gave us credibility. Then we
decided that the wind and watercolors and rain didn’t work very well
together, so we chose to start going to the museum shows. One of the
first ones was the art museum in Oklahoma City. They used to have a
salon show, and I remember going to ask about entering that show. The
proprietor at the time of the museum said, “You can try, but it’s really
hard to get in here. It’s just really hard to get in here.” I was determined
even more. I think that was the year they used my piece on the brochure
for the museum show, so I was pretty tickled. It was very encouraging.

Little Thunder

What was the collector base for western art? Were people really
interested in western art then?

Terpening

Western art was starting to really boom about the time I was just getting
into it. I wasn’t really doing what I call western art. I was doing more
realism. I was doing architectural pieces, still life pieces. But because
they were in watercolor and something different, the Cowboy Hall—I’m
trying to think of some of the other museums that took me in. At that
time because it was realism, I was kind of pushed backwards into the
western art because I had realism, and they seemed to think it fit with
what they were doing. Maybe they were trying to broaden the western
scope at that point, but it was really when things were starting to just
take off. I was at the bottom of that until I took that rise and backed into
western art that way, I guess. As I got to know the western artists and go
out with them to paint on different ranches and got to meet more people
and study and travel more, then my work started getting progressively
more western subject.

Little Thunder

When you say architectural, you were doing buildings or…

Terpening

Yes, yes, a lot of Victorian houses and barns, which was very, very
popular at the time. In watercolor, to do white buildings or white
anything is adding, because the white is the white of the paper, and you
have to add color to make it appear white. That to me was just
fascinating. I did a lot of Galveston Victorian houses or things around
here, white lace tablecloths, white flowers, a lot of white on white. That
was just things that I really enjoyed. Then eventually I started adding the
people with the buildings, and that kind of led me into starting to do

9

more portraiture. I really started getting into that with the oils more
when I picked that up.
Little Thunder

When did you pick up oils?

Terpening

Ten, fifteen years ago, now. Probably fifteen years ago. I’d been
working exclusively in watercolor for twenty, twenty-three or four years.
In the western art genre, pretty much there’s paintings and then there’s
oil paintings. To me, it was all about the oil. Everything else is just kind
of a lesser medium.

Little Thunder

There’s a hierarchy.

Terpening

There is definitely a hierarchy, definitely. Donald Teague made that
break, but there weren’t many others. There were a couple people
drawing, a couple doing acrylics and other medium, but for the most part
it was all oil painting. I realized I could not make a living at this, doing
watercolor exclusively, and that’s all I wanted to do, was do this full
time. I just couldn’t think of doing anything else, and we knew I wasn’t
going to be a teacher.

Little Thunder

And you couldn’t command those prices for a watercolor that you could
for an oil.

Terpening

You can’t. I do now, or pretty close to it. There’s still that prejudice, but
I figure it’s harder to do a watercolor, and it takes more time. People are
so much more educated about watercolors now, the skill it takes to really
do one, and you can’t correct them, which is the big one. I sometimes
will do an oil painting, scrape off that face four times before I like it, and
it’s not going to change the painting any. That’s really the only reason I
got into doing oils is because I knew I needed to go ahead and make a
living at it. Mark was only going to support me just so long. (Laughter)
Then it was my turn.

Little Thunder

So the western art movement is taking off, and you’re one of a handful of
women, really, because the women are in the minority, and still are, in
this predominantly male-dominated field of art. What was that like?
What challenges did you encounter?

Terpening

Okay, how do we do this politically? (Laughs) In some ways it was an
asset. In some ways it really was because I assume they knew they had
to have x amount of women in the group. I’m going to talk a little more
specifically about the Prix de West. It was Prix de West when I came in.
In about a hundred artists, there would be ten, eleven women, so I think I
got more recognition being a woman. I never applied to it. They asked
me in (I’m very blessed to say that was a real asset) I think because I

10

was a woman and because I was working primarily in watercolor at the
time, again, something they might need because it was the minority. I
think both those things gave me recognition early on, so they were an
asset.
There’s so many great women artists out there, and I would like to see
more of them in the larger shows. They’ve made groups of their own to
support themselves, like the Cowboy Artists of America made their own
group to support themselves. I consider myself an artist, not a woman
artist. I’m just an artist. I just paint. I don’t want to separate myself into
one place or another. I would like to see a lot more comingling,
somehow.
Little Thunder

Because it is by invitation.

Terpening

It is by invitation, yes.

Little Thunder

Is there a committee that sort of decides who is invited?

Terpening

Because I never went through that process, I’m not sure. I know that you
can apply for it, and there is a committee that will select you. It’s so
much harder now than it was when I came through. I happened to come
in the year that it changed from NAWA to Prix de West. There was a big
turnover, and I think maybe it made it a little easier for me to get in.

Little Thunder

You do a lot of women and children in your work. How do you approach
your depictions of women in the west, perhaps, differently from other
painters?

Terpening

I say I paint the softer side of the west because the west was explored by
the cowboys. It wasn’t settled until the women and children came along.
I think, being a woman, even though I haven’t had children, you have
that nurturing, maternal viewpoint, so I think I can understand that a
little bit better. I got into doing the women and children more and more.
I found them cute, and I liked it to begin with.
My great-great-aunt left a handwritten diary of when she settled the
Cherokee Strip, and they lived in a dugout. Her life there was just
incredible, all told from the woman’s point of view, from losing her first
child out there, just she and her husband by themselves, to funny things.
She was dusting a cabinet, and she had china, and she set it on the
gateleg table which fell and broke all of her china. She was sitting in the
middle of all of this crying, and then it dawned on her how trivial this
was, but it was the only beautiful thing she had. There were so many
stories there, and that’s what really got me into saying, “Okay, there’s
stories to be told.” That lit background of mine—I’m a frustrated writer.

11

I tell my stories with paint.
Little Thunder

Have you drawn a fair number of paintings from that journal?

Terpening

I have done some. By talking about this to other people, or when they
see my paintings, they tell me their stories, so it just blossomed. I’m
taking bits and pieces. I’m hoping I’m telling everybody’s story more.

Little Thunder

What other kinds of research do you do for painting?

Terpening

Oh, my. I say 50 percent of my job is looking. I like to go find
something that’s happening as opposed to setting it up. I like to steal a
little bit of real life and hold it on canvas.

Little Thunder

Do you take photographs?

Terpening

I take photographs. The camera is with me all the time. It’s in the car. I
mean, it’s with me all the time. The camera’s always there. Like I said, if
I can catch stories, that’s where I’m happiest. I have a group of
reenactors that work with me and models that work with me. We’ll go
out to ranches, and the hands, when they’re not hamming it up, will let
me shoot them while they’re working and tell me stories, explain to me
about different things that they’re doing. The reenactors explain the
history to me. They get pretty hammy, too. (Laughter)

Little Thunder

That’s really interesting because they’re people who are committed to
exploring, as reenactors, the period, as well.

Terpening

I could do the research book-wise, but these people are fanatical, and
they get it right. They are my best resource to making sure that
everything I do is correct, and they love it. They’re crazy, but it’s that
enthusiasm that, again, comes out in what I’m doing. So, to me, it makes
even a period piece become alive because they play pretend, and there
they are. I don’t think it’s pretend to them all the time. (Laughter) The
same with the cowboys. They’re really working and doing their job, but
because I happen to be there and be interested in it, it brings it alive to
them, too, and they enjoy telling me about it.

Little Thunder

Do you have to book them way in advance?

Terpening

Well, I know enough now that they’ll tell me when they’re going to
work their cows or do branding. I love to go out and see the oldfashioned way of branding. Or if they’re working their colts for a show
or something, then they let me know. I’ve got one painting, which is one
of my best stories, I think, is called Still Beats Office Work. It’s cowboys
out doing their job in downpour rain, with puddles, cold and gray. That

12

was supposed to be a beautiful sunny day. I was going to go out and
watch them work colts. We got out there, and the weather changed. It
was miserable, but they’re still out there working. So there was a story I
wasn’t anticipating that came about.
Little Thunder

Do they get to come see the finished paintings? Do they go to the
shows?

Terpening
Oh, yes, and love it. We’ve had a couple of them show up at the Cowboy
Hall when I had a painting or two down there that they were in, and they
have to get their picture taken with it. One of them was saying
something about he’s trying to make me rich, but I make him famous.
(Laughter)
Little Thunder
And the re-enactors, do they let you know? Are they also simultaneously
there for another kind of event, or do you actually book them?
Terpening
We book them. A group of artists will get together and hire them to
come and play (I call it playing) for us because they will stay in
character and costume for three days at a time. I do it with a group down
on the Brazos River. You’ll have Indians doing something on horseback
here, and you’ll have pioneer women and children and cows being run
across the river. We do a lot of this on the Brazos right by a highway
bridge. You can hear the cars coming to a screeching stop on the bridge
when they get a glimpse of what’s going on down there. It’s like,
“Where am I? Twilight zone?” (Laughter) It’s kind of neat.
Little Thunder
That is really neat. The paintings I’ve seen that are landscape paintings,
some of them look like Texas, Oklahoma. Some of them look like New
Mexico. What draws you to both those landscapes?
Terpening
Love of it? I don’t know. It’s an emotional appeal. We’ve had
connections with all of that, family connections that draw me. Mark’s
grandparents lived out in Arizona and took us to a lot of the Indian
reservations. Living here in Oklahoma, we did a lot of the powwows, so
I’ve got a lot of that appeal that is important to me because it’s such a
culture, such a way of life that is just wonderful. I try to experience that.
Texas, I ended up there not really expecting to go to Texas, but it has its
own lore and history that is just fascinating. A lot of it, I suppose, comes
from growing up with all the westerns that we grew up with on TV as
kids, and the movies. Some of that is real, and some of it is what we
wish was real, and that’s probably what I’m looking for and trying to
depict, too.
Little Thunder
Why do you think it’s important for western art to continue on, for
people to have access to it?

13

Terpening
Oh, our history, our history. This is unique to America. What we have
here, a lot of it is because of the TV and movie lore, too, but this is so
unique to us, and it’s so known all across the United States. But it’s
going away so fast. The ranches are being divided up. People are going
out and herding cows with trucks and four wheel drives and not on
horseback anymore. Just the culture, Indian culture, we’re losing so fast.
I feel inadequate to capture it, but I want to. I just do. I feel like maybe
that’s part of the stories. My family was so involved in settling the west,
too, and it’s those stories I just want to keep telling so they’re not gone
completely.
Little Thunder
You won the first Smelser-Vallion award from the OSU Foundation.
What is the purpose of it, and what will it allow you to do?
Terpening
The purpose of that was to send an artist out to Taos, New Mexico, when
the students are out there for, I believe, two different two-week sessions,
to send a professional artist out there to interact with them so that not
only are they in this magical place of New Mexico with that light that’s
every bit as gorgeous as all the artists from eons-one said it was, but just
to show them that you can make a living at this. I, growing up, thought I
had to be a teacher, which is wonderful, but there’s other aspects you
can do with the arts. One of them is really to be a professional with
them, answering questions, showing them what it’s like to paint on
location, get out of the studio and capture that moment-to-moment
change in light, to be on your toes when you’re doing plein air paintings.
(Laughs)
Little Thunder
You were able in 2010 to spend a couple of weeks out at the Doel Reed
Center.
Terpening
Yes, yes. That’s such a magnificent, magnificent gift. My big goal when
I was out there was to capture it in paint before it changed because I
knew they had plans for it. Martha Reed was still living on the property
at the time. The studio was just like he had walked out. The studio
looked like Doel Reed had left two seconds ago. It was amazing. I
wanted to capture it the way it was while Martha was still there. I
painted on the property, painted all the buildings on the property, all the
buildings together on the property. It was a great experience to be out
there for that. And the gift, what they’re going to do with this piece of
property is going to be incredible for OSU. When I first heard about it, I
kept saying, “Oh, if they had just had that when I was in school!” I can
imagine what this is going to be, but to experience it at this point, too.
Little Thunder
Is it a little more difficult to convey character when you’re painting a
building or a structure as opposed to like a person or an animal?

14

Terpening
Interesting question because I would always say my architectural pieces
are portraits without people. I don’t think so. To me, there’s so much
character. People put such an imprint on buildings. I guess I’m not
drawn to them if they don’t have some kind of a characteristic or
something unique and exciting about it. I see a personality in both.
Little Thunder
You’re about to open a solo show here on January 9. How many images
will you have? Will they be a mix of oils and watercolors?
Terpening
I’ve got about fifteen paintings in the show, and they are a mix of oils
and watercolor. Some of them, they’re probably the last couple of years
of paintings. I have some personal favorites of mine that we held back.
There are some pretty good-sized ones, some thirty-by-forties, thirtythirty-sixes in the oils. None of these are studies. These are all studio
pieces, not like the paintings I did at the Doel Reed which were all plein
air studies. When I was putting it together, it kind of runs from a
southwestern architectural, some missions from New Mexico and
Arizona, and a façade of a mission in Mexico, to a little vignette of
flowers that were sitting in a window looking out, to some people. I’ve
got a mother-daughter piece and sister piece that shows that interaction
that I like to catch with my portraits.
Little Thunder
What are the important shows for you now?
Terpening
The biggest one would be the Prix de West in Oklahoma City at the
National Cowboy and Western Heritage Museum. Let me get that all
out! (Laughter) It’s always going to be the Cowboy Hall to me. That’s
the biggest one that I do, the most prestigious, probably because I feel
like that was where my education came from. That’s very important to
me. The Gilcrease Museum in Tulsa, that’s an incredible museum. It’s
an incredible honor to be one of the Rendezvous artists. They choose
those and honor just a few artists at a time with a special show, and
that’s very good. We’re having a reunion Rendezvous coming up, which
is going to be exciting for all the artists to come back, which will be
great.
Little Thunder
Also, you’ve done the Autry.
Terpening
Yes, the Autry Museum in Los Angeles, California, which is a beautiful
museum. It has a fabulous show. It’s as great as the Cowboy Hall show.
It’s a beautiful, beautiful museum that it’s in. That show, with my
watercolor, I took first. I was the first woman artist to take the
watercolor award there, or any other award, in that show. I’m trying to
think of the name of the show.
M. Terpening

15

Masters of the American West.
Terpening
Masters of the American West, yes, okay.
Little Thunder
Watercolors are really your first love, and you’ve done a wonderful
explanation that it’s their aliveness that attracts you. I wonder if you
could talk a bit about a statement that you work with a combination of
wet and dry techniques.
Terpening
In the watercolor? Okay. Because I think of it as being this living,
breathing medium, it’s hard to think exactly like that, but I work in
transparent layers of color. The watercolors I use are totally transparent.
The white is only the white of the paper. I think of it like veils of color,
like silk scarves, one put on top of another. I will start with the brightest
color. Perhaps, to me, it’s sunlight hitting an object, so it’ll be a nice
yellow, but then I’m starting to model.
I’m going to give you an example of a face. I’ll put the yellow—you
have to leave the white from the beginning. You have to know where the
white’s going to be, so you have to leave that. I’ll put the veil of yellow
on there, and while it’s still wet, I’ll drop in blues to set it back and reds
to pull it forward. My next color on that when that’s completely dry now
—because there’s a certain point where you can’t touch watercolor
again. You’ve got to leave it alone, or it’s going to make marks. You
have to know when to get in and when to get out of a watercolor. It’s
kind of treacherous. The next step would be, then, to model that color by
adding another layer, perhaps a brownish layer if it’s skin tones, or a
more blue layer if it’s in shadow.
Again, everything’s going to show through, so the whole model of the
face, that roundness, is always going to show through. I’ll do that, even
on the folds in cloth or on a tablecloth. Once you get that very first,
where you’re starting to sink it in and pull it forward, then that’s always
going to show through. Color is not just mixed. It’s layered. Or if I’m
working grays, gray areas, because I love to do so many white-on-white
pieces—I love the white because it’s made up of all color. To show that
on white paper, I will use a combination of a red, yellow, and blue in
various red, yellows, and blues, that if I stirred together would make
gray. I’ll drop them into a wet area of paint and let them melt together.
They’ll make your eyes read it as gray, but you’ll still have the three
colors individually.
Little Thunder
The paper itself, as you’ve mentioned, is so important. Is there a
particular kind of weight of watercolor paper that you use?
Terpening
Oh, I’m so picky. I am so picky with my tools because, number one, I

16

think you need to know your tools. When I give a class, I’m like, “Know
your tools. Know your tools.” But, yes, I use an Arches 300-pound cold
press paper, and I will use nothing else, (Laughter) unless I’m out
working plein air with it, and then I work vertical. I work on a slight
slant most of the time. When I’m out painting on location, plein air with
the watercolors, I’ll work vertical. I use, I think it’s 140-weight cold
press in a block so it doesn’t warp. The tension on that, the sizing keeps
that bead of water on the paper so that it doesn’t just run off on my shoe.
It stays there. I see it better if I work vertically.
Little Thunder
How much of your time do you spend doing on-site plein air as opposed
to the studio?
Terpening
Not enough. Not enough. Not enough. I don’t live out in the country
anymore. Our little town in Texas has gotten kind of surrounded by the
metroplex now, so it takes me an hour to get out of town, and I don’t get
out near enough. I try to take special trips every year to paint on
location, but I would say probably less than 20 percent, 15 percent of my
time is spent outside anymore. I’m sorry about that because I think you
see, you train your eye so much better outside. You learn to match color
so much better, and you learn how to paint faster out there. You don’t
get as lazy as you do in the studio.
Little Thunder
When you picked up oils, was that like a huge re-education process, in a
way?
Terpening
Absolutely. Absolutely. I had worked in oils when I was younger and
then I quit for this twenty-some years. My description of it, where
watercolor was breathing and alive and this living medium, oil paints
were gunky. They were just, they were messy, and they were thick. You
would mix the color up, and you’d put it on the canvas, and it would just
sit there. It didn’t flow or bleed or blend. It was very frustrating. I did it
only because I felt like I needed to, I really had to, and because I wanted
a different effect. The watercolor paints from leaving white to the
darkest color. Oil paint, you start with your darks and you go, and then
you add the white at the last. I thought I was going to have to have a
pseudonym. I really did. I thought, “Here’s this gunky medium and this
beautiful medium. Nobody’s going to know it’s the same person.” When
I would finish them to put them side by side, a style gets you (you don’t
get a style) because they looked like my work, both of them. (Laughter)
Little Thunder
What has been one of the special pleasures of working in oil?
Terpening
Every time I sit down, I think I’m going to be Monet, but that hasn’t
worked yet. (Laughter) I think the reworkability of it. In watercolor, you
might finish a painting, and if you mess up on this little section, you’re

17

going to tear it up and start the whole thing over. Then you’re hoping
you get that same fresh spontaneity back that you had the first time.
With oil paints, if that little look is not right, when I’m doing a child or a
cowboy, that little sparkle or that little uniqueness that I want, if it’s not
there, you can scrape it off and keep working at it until you finally get it
right. Now, the downfall is that watercolor dries, and it’s done. Oil
paintings, you could do three or four paintings on top of each other.
There’s no way to quit. You have to know, “It stops now.”
Little Thunder

Terpening

Your husband and I happened to be talking about that. I understand that
sometimes when you get to a place in a work where you feel you’re too
close to it, you’ll put it in the closet. (Laughter) Tell us the gremlin
story.

Little Thunder

Yes, yes, I think every artist has this. I have little gremlins I keep in the
closet. I don’t feed them. I’m kind of mean to them. When you finish a
painting, you’re looking either at the part that gave you the worst
trouble, or you’re just seeing the brush strokes. You no longer can see
the overall—you have an idea in your mind. It may not be what came
out, exactly. It doesn’t mean it’s wrong, but you’re not content with it
because it wasn’t completely what was in your mind, so I stick them
away in the closet for a while. Usually, I paint them upside down for a
little bit. If you turn them upside down, you look at them differently.
You look at them in a mirror because it reverses the image. If I’m
getting too tight, I really do work them upside down and then stick them
in the closet. Those little gremlins are probably the most talented little
animals I know because sometimes they fix it. They either fix it and I go,
“Not so bad,” when I pull it out a week later, or they mess it up really
good, and then I tear it up, burn it. (Laughter)

Terpening

Do you do a lot of preparatory sketching before you start a piece, or is it
different with watercolors and oils?
Hmm, I don’t know. I hadn’t thought about different ways between the
two mediums. I do a lot of mental preparation. Everything I do is about a
story. Once I get the story and the pieces together for the story, whether
I’ve put my models together or I found a piece, like a bike leaning
against a wall with the sun on it just right and I want to paint that, once I
get the story that I want to tell and find the pieces, then most of my prep
work is in my mind. It’s like I’ll sit there and stare at it and think about it
and analyze it. If I’m pulling pieces together from photographs, then I do
a lot more preliminary sketches in work. If I’m doing something that
I’ve been on location, then of course I’ve got the plein air piece that
gives me the true colors.
For the most part, I’ll sit down and start working on a piece, which

18

M. Terpening

sometimes gets me in trouble, but I’ll want all of my excitement that I’ve
got to go ahead on that piece. Now, if it’s a commission piece, then I
will do studies, like the library piece. If you look at a study, and then you
look at the final large painting, you’ll find quite a bit of difference,
really, when you start looking at it. The idea is the same, but I got tired
and changed this or that or was more excited about it.

Terpening

This is Mark talking. Whenever she does start a piece, though, she
always starts with a very detailed drawing.

Little Thunder

Oh, on the paper, yes, yes. That’s, to me, part of the final piece, not a
prep work. I almost say it’s like paint by number. I mean, I draw shapes.
I don’t draw line because, to me, a colored area or light or dark are
shapes. The line doesn’t tell me anything. A shape does, and it is very,
very detailed. Then I’m absolutely free not to follow in the lines. It’s
there for me to fall back onto if I get lost, but I’m not worried about
making it tight and detailed. In fact, it’s just kind of there. Whether it
shows up in the watercolor, the pencil drawings, or not doesn’t bother
me in the least because, to me, that’s part of the whole idea of
transparent medium. The pencil, I don’t care. I’m a little more concerned
in the oil painting, but it’s a lot easier to lose those lines in an oil
painting, too.

Terpening

What is your creative process, starting with the time you get an idea?

Little Thunder

I think getting the idea, about as much as anything as far as the creative
process, is finding a story, deciding on a story. I can’t say deciding on a
story. It’s finding a story. What is it that intrigued me to get that
emotion, that excitement that I want to paint? Then it’s holding that
feeling while you’re working because you don’t want to get tied up in
the technical ability, or you’re going to lose that spark and that life. I
think that’s what is the difference between maybe a flat piece of art and
one that reaches out and hopefully grabs the viewer in. I think that’s not
as much the color of the paint as the color you felt when you were
putting the paint on.

Terpening

In the process of trying to hold onto that feeling, you’re making so many
specific decisions. Can you talk about how painting is really such a
problem-solving process?
It is. Somebody once told me that an artist will make more decisions in
an hour than executives do because you’re thinking, always. Color
value, push and pull. Is it working? What does it relate to the other
parts? Am I getting the integrity there? Did the head get too big? Is the
horse’s tack correct? There’s so many decisions and so many aspects
from technical to artistic. Emotion, when it happens, when it falls out of

19

the brushes and it’s starting to work, you can’t help but be in awe of
what’s happening because it’s beyond you. It’s in some other dimension.

Little Thunder

When you have the bad days and nothing is falling under those brushes
just right, that’s hard to keep the emotion happy. That’s hard to keep
working. Well, you keep working because you just know you’re going to
get it right in a minute, whether that’s a good thing or not. That’s
probably when you should put it up and give it to the gremlins. Mark
often says that he never knows who he’s going to come home to. Is it
going to be the good witch or the bad witch? (Laughter) It kind of
depends on how the paint went.

Terpening

What is your creative routine? Do you prefer painting during the day, at
night, every day?
It was real hard when I first started to paint full time to be very
disciplined at it. I decided it’s got to be a job, and I’ve got to look at this
like a job. So when Mark would go to work, I would start painting. Like
I said, 50 percent of my job is seeing, so sometimes my artwork is going
out to find a story, going out to find inspiration. I’ll travel, drive around
the country, travel up and down cute little towns, see Victorian houses.
That’s all part of it, but I do it disciplined as much as I can, nine to five.
Actually, I do business in the mornings, so it’s more like ten to six.

Little Thunder

Mark knows enough to warn me when he comes home. He calls, and he
goes, “On my way,” and I try to stop. I’ll try to take the weekends off,
too. That rarely happens, but at least we are good about trying to take
Sundays off, anyway, because I think you do need some rest time. As the
business has grown, all of a sudden you have shows to go to, things to
attend, giclees to get out, business, framing. There’s this whole other
concept that’s part of the job, too. That takes up more time than I would
like it to. I’d like to just be production staff. (Laughter)

Terpening

We mentioned that art is really a two-person job. Can you talk a bit
about what Mark has contributed to the art business?
I couldn’t do it without him. I really couldn’t. He’s been there from the
beginning, and he has probably more faith in me than I even do. He just,
he has an eye. He has a great artistic eye, but more than that, he’s got a
layman’s eye, as well. He can look at it where I’m stuck in the brush
strokes. He can look at what I’m doing from the finished piece as a
person off the street would see it, which is who I’m painting for, just
people to love it. He also knows when I’m not doing my best because he
knows my potential, and he won’t let that go, either.
He’s very, very honest, and you have to have that honesty. You just have

20

Little Thunder

to have that honesty. He says that sometimes he’s more honest than
others, not that I’m a temperamental person, but… (Laughter) He’s
probably my best PR, too, because I would rather be alone with paints
than anywhere else, and Mark loves people. He’s great at meeting
people and explaining what I do. People come up to me so often and say,
“He really is proud of you and your art.” That’s such a neat thing to
hear.

Terpening

Looking back on your career so far, what is a particularly memorable
honor or award that you’ve received?

Little Thunder

I think being invited into some of these museum shows like the Prix de
West and the Autry and the Gilcrease Rendezvous, I think that’s an
award in itself, where they’ve chosen you and asked you to be a part of
this exclusive group because they can only hold so many. I think that’s
probably a huge award, particularly the Prix de West. The Autry award,
the one that I got for watercolor, to me, was extremely important
because it was a watercolor award, number one. People have a tendency
to think of watercolors and paintings, “I’ll buy paintings. Watercolor is
this little thing off on its own.” It has a little bit of prejudice against it,
even though I think most people really understand it is a harder medium.
I think getting that, and because I was the only woman who has won an
award there so far at the Autry Museum, that was very prestigious and
important to my heart.

Terpening

It’s kind of amusing because you mentioned you found out quickly you
weren’t a teacher, but there’s obviously a lot of enthusiasm in your
voice when you talk about the possibility of teaching a class and when
you’ve taught at this point in your life. When you teach at this point in
your life, what does that bring to your artwork?

Little Thunder

That’s interesting because teaching, now, I find incredibly enjoyable.
Usually I’m teaching adults or older students that have a love for art and
they want to learn. That’s so exciting to be able to give them this and to
watch them, just like sponges, sucking this up. That’s terribly exciting.
It’s amazing how much I learn from it. In that, the art changes, too.
When you have to verbalize things that you do almost automatically,
because I’ve done them for so long, that cues you in a little bit about,
“Oh, and you’re doing it because why?” and “Maybe if you try this…” I
think it does advance the art. Also, I learn from the students as much,
too, by their questions or maybe a technique that they’re experimenting
with, and I’m going, “I like that.” It’s very much a two-way street.

Terpening

Looking back on your career, what was a turning point in the road for
you where you maybe could’ve gone one way but you made this choice
to go a different way?

21

M. Terpening

My student teaching. That was a big one when I decided I had to do that.
(Laughter) I’m thinking.

Terpening

I would think that your decision to start working in oil, as well, has been
a big change, and how you did it when you first introduced them.
That’s true. That’s true because that was something I felt at the time I
was kind of forced to do. Have learned to love the oils as much as the
watercolor. There’s still that little bit of pivotalness there when I realize,
because they paint so differently, if I would stay in one medium only,
then maybe I could push the envelope harder and faster than going back
and forth. And yet, there’s things I want to say in both. The story tells
me which medium it wants to be set in.

Little Thunder

I think if I had stayed in the watercolor exclusively, I couldn’t have risen
to the top because I would have had to balance the watercolor with either
another job or different things that the oils opened the door for. At the
same time, the watercolors, being a little bit more limited medium,
opened the doors for the oils, as well. I’m trying to think of something
negative that happened because I know there were plenty. (Laughs)

Terpening

I do have a question about a low point in your career.

M. Terpening

Yes, this is what I was trying to think about. “What is the low point?”
There were a few. Help me with this one a little bit.

Terpening

The watercolor AWS award that you didn’t get.
Oh, this was kind of interesting. I don’t know if it’s the same one that
Mark was talking about. There are certain watercolor organizations that
are real prestigious, the signature organizations, and one of them was
American Watercolor Society. The first year I applied to that—I still do
not have my AWS signature. I have National Watercolor, but not AWS.
The first year I decided to apply for it, I was pretty new into watercolor,
actually. A fine artist that I cannot think whose name it is right now.
Hopefully, I can get this in a little bit. Anyway, that artist, they had been
a judge of AWS and also had a signature status. When I got my rejection
notice, he came over, and I was telling him about it. He says, “I want
you to go out, and I want you to buy yourself something wonderful, just
wonderful! Go buy something that you’re going to love. And next year,
when you get your rejection notice, go buy something else wonderful.
Do that until one day you’ll be in, and you won’t be buying yourself
anything wonderful anymore. It will be your reward for this and make it
not so bad!” (Laughter)

22

Little Thunder

So I did. I went out and I bought a little fancy, limited edition teddy bear
that I had my eye on. I named him Alliwishis because all I wish is that I
was in that show really bad. I still look at that teddy bear going, “Uh, not
so much.” (Laughter)

Terpening

What’s been one of the high points? We might have touched on them.

Little Thunder

The high points, probably, like I said, I think getting into the Prix de
West because it was kind of my education. That was a high point,
getting the award at Autry. The Gilcrease, being invited into the
Gilcrease. They’re just an amazing museum. Since I grew up in
Oklahoma, my early adulthood, these were the museums that I would go
to, to see art. That was my incredible education, to have such wonderful
museums in this state, just wonderful museums. The Philbrook, also.

Terpening

What’s it like now to think here you are at OSU, you came to the Edmon
Low Library, I’m sure, numerous times as a student…

Little Thunder

Oh, I practically lived here, yes.

Terpening

…and now you have this painting commissioned to hang in the library,
an original oil.

Little Thunder

In a way, I’m probably more timid about it than a lot of the other places
because it’s going to be here. I’m going to have to look at it every time I
come. We lived off campus when we were in school, Mark and I, and
the library, particularly the third floor, was like second home to me. I’d
come in between classes, and there was a carrel in one corner that I think
I slept on most of the time. This was my go-to place, which is the big
reason I wanted this painting to come here, because it’s like bringing a
painting home, and I wanted to hang a painting in my house. That’s
probably one of my biggest honors is to have it here. I expected it was
going to be in an office somewhere, and to see where they’re going to
hang it was breathtaking. It really was. It’s just exciting.

Terpening

We’re going to look at a preparatory painting for the painting that’s
going to be officially unveiled January 26. This is the preparatory
painting for the oil painting that’s going to be hanging here in the
library that we’ve commissioned from you. It’s called Just One More
Chapter. Can you talk a bit about how you got the idea for this piece?
Well, the only stipulation I had, other than size because it had a
particular place it was going to fit, was the library really wanted a
cowboy reading. That left everything open to me, so I was thinking
chuck wagon, cook reading. No, that wasn’t quite right. Cowboy by the
fire, in the evening by the campfire, and I thought that kind of insinuated

23

Little Thunder

that he put reading off until the last minute, and that’s not exactly the
way I always was. I always said, “Let me have one more chapter, Mom,
one more chapter,” every time I was reading at night. I wanted it to be
this cowboy who is a working cowboy. He’s on a ranch; his horse is a
cow pony. He’s out there, but he’s taking a break in the middle of the
day, and he’s reading, absorbed in this book in a whole other place,
another world. The horse is obviously ready to go back to work, and he’s
saying, “Just one more chapter, just one more chapter.”

Terpening

I think that’s great because the popular idea of you’re either a man of
action or you’re a man who reads...

Little Thunder

Yes, absolutely, and none of the cowboys that I talked to on the ranches
ever downplayed books or stories. This is also important to them. A lot
of them are poets. One of the cowboys, we were out on a ranch, and we
were taking a break to get something, and he pulls a book of poetry out
of his pocket and starts reading. I wanted to show that, as well, in this.

Terpening

Did you use a working cowboy as a model?

Little Thunder

Yes, I did. Yes, I did. This young man, that’s what he does for a living.
That’s all he ever wanted to do. He grew up on a ranch and works there
now. And that is his horse, and he trained it.

Terpening

Wearing his own outfit.

Little Thunder

Wearing his own clothes, yes.

Terpening

What are some of the differences between this and the painting that
we’ll hopefully be capturing on video later?
When I did this study, trying to get my first-impression ideas and also to
show what the larger piece is going to be like, to see if it was going to be
something that they wanted that would work with them, I had the
constraints of this size, which I think was in proportion. But when I
started blowing it up—you can only do a figure so large and still be
comfortable, and I wanted him to be overpowered with the tree. In
proportion, I think the figure is a little bit smaller to the tree in the real
painting. I opened up the landscape so that it was obviously the plains,
Oklahoma, as opposed to anywhere else.
I think that’s probably the biggest difference is the changes there. There
was a linear tangent (a little technical here) where I’ve got a branch
that’s coming kind of close to the horse’s head. In the small study, it was
a directional object that I thought would work, and in the large painting
it just didn’t. It was just too awkward, and we decided to take that out. I

24

Little Thunder

say “we” because Mark had a lot to do with that, too, as he walked in
with his fresh eyes and said, “No, no.” (Laughter) We brought the colors
up a lot more, too, because when you start enlarging things, you’ve got
more color play to work with.

Terpening

The color on the blanket of the horse is definitely much brighter in the
bigger painting.

Little Thunder

And, actually, the clouds have a little more color in them and brighter,
too.

Terpening

I think it’s a nice choice of an orange book…

Little Thunder

Thank you, very good. (Laughter)

Terpening

…and the sycamore tree. What are some of the, like lovegrass, some of
the things that you associate with Oklahoma landscape?

Little Thunder

The grasses, I’m not going to say I got technical about this, but I know
about bluestem and tall, some of the grasses, like you were saying, the
sweet grasses and some of these things that I wanted in there. I wanted
to show that this isn’t a groomed pasture. This is the way it was, or is
today, still. And the sycamore tree, the sycamores have always been my
favorite tree. They’re just big and mighty, and this one was just exactly
the way it is in the painting. We saw it, propped up there, and it was like,
“Okay, story told.”

Terpening

Your title, I think, is very clever. Do you spend a lot of time thinking
about your titles?

Little Thunder

My titles will either come immediately when I’m in the process of doing
a piece or when I get the story. I mean, it’s there from the first paint
stroke on. That’s the way it was with this one. I knew exactly—well, no.
I had one or two titles. As soon as I put the horse in there, I knew exactly
what it was going to be because the horse is so ready to leave, and he
isn’t. That one came about midstream. If a title doesn’t come
immediately, it’s like pulling teeth. Sometimes we get everybody we
know, and we sit down in front of the painting and go, “Okay, this one’s
got to be titled. Let’s have another glass of wine and figure it out.”
(Laughter)

Terpening

For me, your paintings often of these normal everyday things, they’re
sort of like that moment that’s a special opportunity. It’s a routine
moment, but there’s an opportunity for a door to open there in that
moment.

25

M. Terpening

Thank you. Thank you. I feel like I’m grabbing a moment in time and
trying to hold onto it forever, and you caught it. If you could read that
from it, I appreciate that because that’s what I’m trying to do. It’s your
story I’m telling, and I’m just stealing it and trying to put it down on
canvas.

Terpening

I think a lot of her stories, to your point, she said earlier, some of the
landscapes or some of the architecturals are portraits but without the
people. The people, you expect something to happen. You know
something is going to happen. She captures, sometimes, a particular
moment in time that you can tell what’s happening. I like that you said it
is the everyday, but her paintings help you see the uniqueness in our
everyday lives that we sometimes may overlook.

Little Thunder

Making the ordinary extraordinary.

Terpening

Great. Well, anything else you’d like to add?

M. Terpening

I don’t think so.

Terpening

What an honor it is to…

Little Thunder

It is an honor. It is an honor to be doing this. I was kind of taken aback
when you said, “Do an oral history,” so this was exciting. (Laughs)

Terpening

Well, we are looking forward to the ribbon cutting on January 26.
Thank you both.
Thanks, thank you. I’m very, very honored and excited.
------- End of interview -------

26

