Sylvia Duncan
Oral History Interview
Interviewed by Juliana Nykolaiszyn
May 19, 2014
Stillwater, Oklahoma
Nykolaiszyn

My name is Juliana Nykolaiszyn, and today is Monday, May 19, 2014, and I
am in Stillwater, Oklahoma, interviewing Sylvia Duncan as part of the OState Stories Oral History Project. Thank you for joining me today.

Duncan

I’m pleased that you asked me.

Nykolaiszyn

Well, Sylvia, I’d like to learn a little bit more about you. Could you tell me
the year you were born and where you were born?

Duncan

I was born in a rather infamous year, 1929, the year of the beginning of the
Great Depression, and I was born in Chickasha, Oklahoma.

Nykolaiszyn

Okay, and what did your parents do for a living?

Duncan

My mother was a homemaker. I was the youngest of five children, even
though they were spread out in long distances apart. My father was rather
itinerant. He did lots of things. He traded horses. (Laughs) He traded all
kinds of things in agricultural fields. At one time, he and my mother, (this
was before living in Chickasha) they actually operated what was known in
those days as a boarding house.

Nykolaiszyn

Can you go into detail about the boarding house? How large was it?

Duncan

I cannot because I was not born at that time. It was in Hobart, Oklahoma,
and as I said, I was the youngest of five children. The two oldest children
were only two years apart. All of the rest were six years apart, so I actually
was born the year that my oldest sister, sibling, graduated from what was
then Oklahoma College for Women in Chickasha.

Nykolaiszyn

Well, tell me about your path to Stillwater. How did your family get from
Chickasha to Stillwater?

4

Duncan

Our family, which at that time consisted of my oldest brother, my brother
just six years older than I, my mother, and myself, we came to Stillwater in
August of 1936, I believe, and the reason was for my older brother to attend
Oklahoma A&M [Agricultural and Mechanical] College as an agronomy
major. I, at that time, was beginning the second grade.

Nykolaiszyn

And why Oklahoma A&M?

Duncan

My brother had been employed with the state conservation service, soil
conversation service, and one of his mentors was a man who I think had
attended A&M. He was the major influence. He saw potential in my brother,
and so he was the catalyst that caused us to come to Stillwater. (Laughter)

Nykolaiszyn

And so your family is starting anew in Stillwater, and what part of town did
they settle in?

Duncan

We rented a house first, which was on East Tenth Street. The house is still
there. It was 323 East Tenth. Today it’s just back of what was the armory,
but now it’s part of the city Parks and Recreation activities.

Nykolaiszyn

Okay, and in Stillwater, what did your parents do for a living?

Duncan

Well, we didn’t have a great living. (Laughs) My mother did find
employment at OSU. She was a cook at the OSU cafeteria for many, many
years. At one point, after we had been in Stillwater for a while, we did move
to a location in north Stillwater, very close to what is now the site of Will
Rogers Elementary School. At that time, there was a dairy farm there, and
we lived on the dairy farm. My two brothers helped the owner of the dairy
farm with the milking and milk processing, and so that was employment for
them. It was a long way from the elementary schools in Stillwater, but I
remember I walked from that location to Jefferson School, which is now the
location of the Board of Education on Main Street.

Nykolaiszyn

That’s quite a walk.

Duncan

It was. (Laughs)

Nykolaiszyn

So, if you could, can you describe Jefferson School for me? How large was
it at that time?

Duncan

It was a two-story building, just a square cube. I think there were probably
four large classrooms on each floor, and on the first floor were the offices,
the principal’s office. There may have been—I think that would be correct
because it went through the first through the sixth grade. There was no
kindergarten, and I think there was just one room for each grade.

5

Nykolaiszyn

And did you take your lunch?

Duncan

Yes, I think I did because we didn’t have a cafeteria, but I don’t remember a
great deal. (Laughs) One of the things I remember about the school
experience there was that we always had immunizations. It was routine to
come, and the county health department, I think it was, gave the
immunizations. Of course, we had to have permission from our parents, but
I know I was very squeamish about that. I was often one who would faint.
(Laughs) But I also remember the principal at that school, a woman named
Beulah Timberlake, and also a teacher who was excellent. Her name was
Frances, F-R-A-N-C-E-S. Jenkins was her maiden name, but she married a
man later in life after she had taught many, many years. She married a man
whose name was Francis, F-R-A-N-C-I-S, Escue. She continued to live in
Stillwater and died just a few years ago. She was very high on penmanship,
and I credit her with my penmanship today. (Laughs)

Nykolaiszyn

Good memories in a rough time. Could you tell that Oklahoma was in the
middle of the Depression growing up?

Duncan

Well, yes. I remember (this was earlier, before we came to Stillwater) for a
very short time, we moved from Chickasha. I was a preschooler. We moved
from Chickasha to the town of Rush Springs, which is about twenty miles
south of Chickasha, and I remember that one of our main foods was sweet
potatoes. They seemed to be plentiful and very nutritious, and so I have
those memories of, but, you know, times were hard.

Nykolaiszyn

So after Jefferson School, where did you attend?

Duncan

Well, to tell you quite truthfully, I attended, I think, every elementary school
in Stillwater. When we first came, I went to Lincoln School. Then I attended
a very small school that is now the Masonic Lodge building at the corner of
Duck and Miller, and at that time it was known as Norwood School. Then
when we moved to this dairy farm, I went to Jefferson School. Then later we
lived in the west part of town, and all of these were rental houses where we
lived. I went to what was Eugene Field School, and that is now the location
where Consumer’s IGA is located.

Nykolaiszyn

Was it challenging bouncing around school to school?

Duncan

I never did have any trouble. (Laughs) I made friends easily, and my grades
never did suffer. I can’t complain. Then I went to Stillwater Junior High
School, and I went to Stillwater High School. Those high schools were
where there was North High School, which is where the Stillwater
Community Center is now, and then there was South High School, where is
now has been converted into the Stillwater Public Library. In the latter part
of my high school career, sometimes we had classes at the North High
6

School and at the South High School, so between classes sometimes you had
to walk that block and a half or two blocks between the two schools. I
graduated from Stillwater High School in 1946. A part of my high school, I
took home economics courses and was active in what was called the Future
Homemakers of Oklahoma, Future Homemakers of America, and actually
served as a state vice president of that organization. I probably took more
math courses than I did home economics. I have been a homemaker, but I
didn’t devote my career to being a home-ec teacher or a home economist of
any kind.
Nykolaiszyn

Well, when you’re in high school and you’re thinking about the future, did
you know what you wanted to be when you grew up?

Duncan

When I was thinking of going to college, I thought I was going to enroll in
architecture and major in architecture. That’s one reason I took a lot of
math, but I changed my major after I met my now-husband. He was an
accounting major because his brother had an accounting practice already
here in Stillwater, and so I changed my major to accounting.

Nykolaiszyn

So let’s talk about your path to OSU. Why did you decide to attend
Oklahoma A&M at that time?

Duncan

Well, one reason is because I could be at home, and we didn’t have that
expense of travel or food and housing. Also, I did receive what was known
as a Presidential Scholarship, and it was only a hundred dollars. I think it
was just a hundred dollars; it may have been a hundred dollars a semester. I
had that during my college career, and that was based upon academic record
in high school. I did graduate as Salutatorian of the graduating class of 1946
and belonged to National Honor Society and those things that go along with
that.

Nykolaiszyn

Now, did you meet your husband at A&M, or was it prior to enrollment?

Duncan

I met him, actually, it was prior to enrollment. He had been in World War II
in the Navy, and he returned from the Navy in the fall-winter, December
really, I think, of 1945. His brother who had the accounting practice in
Stillwater had built an apartment house on South Washington Street, and
that’s where his brother and family lived, which was only a wife and one
daughter. At that time, my mother and brother, just six years older than I,
were living in an apartment, in that apartment building that my husband’s
brother had built, but when my husband returned from the service, they
converted a part of a double-car garage below into a bedroom for him.
Now, technically I didn’t meet him there. I met him at church. I lived right
above where he lived, (Laughs) so our friendship could grow rather quickly.
I didn’t graduate from high school until the spring of 1946, so he was going
7

to school that spring semester to college. He had previously been a student
at Oklahoma A&M back in 1939 and ’40 and had left to go to work because
he ran out of money, and then entered the service from Indiana where he
was working in a factory. Then he came back here to go to school. Instead
of majoring in dairy manufacturing where he had begun his educational
career, he had changed to accounting because of his brother’s business, and
he had a built-in job. That’s sort of the story on that.
Nykolaiszyn

So you met at church originally.

Duncan

We met at church.

Nykolaiszyn

Did he take you on a date?

Duncan

Not then, no, no, no. Actually, my husband is a full nine years older than I.
Sometimes, according to looking at ages, he’s ten years older than I.
(Laughs) No, we didn’t start dating until probably nine months or a year
after he had returned.

Nykolaiszyn

Okay, and what would a typical date in Stillwater be like?

Duncan

Well, we went to church together most of the time. (Laughs) We walked to
school together, to OSU. His brother had a large Chow dog, (his name was
Nicki) and the dog would accompany us walking north on Washington
Street to the campus and to Morrill Hall. Most accounting classes, the school
of accountancy was in Morrill Hall, and we would go in the west entrance.
The dog would accompany us to that point. He would lie down, and he
would wait until we came back out from classes. He would look at
everybody who came out. He was always waiting for us. We didn’t always,
we didn’t have classes together, but we would walk together. If we went out
the other door, we could go around and find him at the west door. He would
do the same thing about going to church. At that time, we were both
members of the Church of Christ, and the Church of Christ building was
located at Sixth and Husband Street on the southeast corner of the
intersection, where now is Oklahoma Abstract Company. Had been
Stillwater Savings and Loan.
Originally, the building that was there at the time had been the old South
Methodist Church building. Then the South Methodist Church and the North
Methodist Church joined forces and became the United Methodist Church.
Anyway, the South Methodist Church building was built with large steps
going up, and concrete sides on them, like, you know, you see a public
building with lions on each side. This Nicki, the dog, would always go to
church. He would either walk if we walked, he would run along if we drove
a car, and he would wait up there on the side of the stairway while we were
in the worship service and would join us when we got out. He would even
8

go if we were out of town. Those are memories of the times that we spent
together. We were both very active in the college-age group at the church,
so we had parties and picnics and those kinds of things, go to Lake
Blackwell and parties at Couch Park.
Nykolaiszyn

Well, let’s talk a little bit about your classes. I’m going to guess that there
were not many women in accounting classes at OSU at that time.

Duncan

You’re extremely correct. (Laughs) I have memories of probably two other
women students majoring in accounting at the time I did, maybe three. One
of my best friends was an accounting major, and she later after graduation
became the head of the Accounting Department at Lubbock Christian
University in Lubbock, Texas. I still keep in touch with her. There were very
few women students. It was always predominantly men, so I was in the
minority.

Nykolaiszyn

Were the faculty members…

Duncan

They were all men. (Laughter)

Nykolaiszyn

And did you have any complications with that?

Duncan

Not really. Not really.

Nykolaiszyn

Where would you sit in the classroom?

Duncan

Oh, the second row back or something.

Nykolaiszyn

I wasn’t sure if you would sit more in the back or more in the front.

Duncan

No, I sat more in the front, generally.

Nykolaiszyn

Okay, okay. Were the classes, were they very challenging?

Duncan

I suppose they were, but I don’t remember struggling with anything. I
remember at that time we didn’t have computers other than the very
beginning stages of punch-card accounting. I remember the labs where we
used punch cards, and the data was punched into cards that were about, oh,
eight inches long, maybe three or four inches high. Those were processed
then to be read. The technology was similar to, like, a player-piano or a
music box, but I remember that. Statistics classes, perhaps, were a little
more challenging, but I don’t remember particularly struggling.

Nykolaiszyn

Were all of your classes in Morrill, or did you have classes in other
buildings?

9

Duncan

At that time, this was right after World War II, and there was all this influx
of veterans returning to the campus. In what is now the parking lots to the
north of Morrill Hall, that was a place where they put up temporary Quonset
huts, and I remember a lot of classes in those Quonset huts behind Morrill
Hall. You know, a Quonset hut is a half of a cylinder, and they’re made of
tin, and so they could be hot, they could be cold, they could be noisy if it
rained. I definitely remember many classes in the Quonset huts. (Laughs)
Particularly, I remember a class in business law taught by Glenn Laughlin.
I guess I remember that because that was probably the spring semester of
my junior year and the honor society Mortar Board which at that time was
only women. Now since, they’ve admitted men to membership. It was
always a very secretive thing before the annual tapping in the spring when
they woke you up and said, “Come as you are, in your pajamas,” or
whatever. Somehow, some of the ones trying to figure out who they would
tap for Mortar Board had talked to this law professor, and he sort of spilled
the beans to me. (Laughs) He didn’t keep it very secretive, so it wasn’t an
extreme surprise to me when on a Sunday morning, I was tapped for Mortar
Board.

Nykolaiszyn

What a great experience.

Duncan

Well, yes, (Laughter) so then I took part in Mortar Board all of my senior
year.

Nykolaiszyn

Are there any other professors that stand out in your memory?

Duncan

Well, the head of the Accounting Department was B. F. Harrison, and there
was a professor, [James] Vandegrift. I’m trying to think of his first name,
which I probably can recall it. Then there were some sort of graduate
students who were teaching. I can think of one by the name of McSwain,
Also [George] McCowen, [who] was not a graduate assistant. [He] was a
regular professor because I had known his daughter in high school.
McCowen was his name. Those are the ones that stand out.

Nykolaiszyn

At what point did you get married?

Duncan

I got married on the day that my husband graduated from Oklahoma A&M,
which was May 31, 1948. I had gone through high school in three years, so I
graduated from high school when I was sixteen. I went through college in
three years. I got married when I was eighteen and graduated from college
when I was nineteen. That was on May 31, 1948. That was the day he
graduated.

Nykolaiszyn

So you graduated in ’49. Do you remember your graduation?

10

Duncan

Yes, I do. It was rather memorable. I remember the graduation exercises.
I’m not sure, but there was a man in the Speech Department, D. Terry
Martin, who always read the names. You handed your name written out as
you came up on the stage. There was an accounting student, a man whose
last name was Dodd, and I’d had classes with him. I knew him. We were
seated and went to the stage in alphabetical sequence. When I handed my
name, I had my name written as Sylvia Hodges Duncan. This doctor, Terry
Martin, he articulated very precisely. He called my name; this Dodd person
had gone ahead of me. He read my name as Sylvia Hodges Dodd, and I
walked across the stage. (Laughs) So that’s the most memorable thing I
remember about my graduation.

Nykolaiszyn

And was it held at the stadium, or at…

Duncan

No, inside Gallagher Hall.

Nykolaiszyn

Okay, so it was in Gallagher.

Duncan

In Gallagher, yes.

Nykolaiszyn

Okay, well, speaking of Gallagher, while you were a student did you attend
any sporting events?

Duncan

I went to a lot of the football games. I don’t remember going to many
basketball games as a student, no...

Nykolaiszyn

Okay.

Duncan

…and I did not go to wrestling. I remember taking phys ed [physical
education] in college because it was required, and that didn’t help my grade
point average. (Laughs)

Nykolaiszyn

Did you have to swim?

Duncan

Yes.

Nykolaiszyn

Can you tell me about the pool and the building?

Duncan

Well, I was trying to think of the name of that building. It’s what has been
converted into the School of Architecture now, but the swimming pool was
on the first floor at the east end. That’s about all I can tell you about it. I
took swimming, I took bowling, but I was not a phys ed major by any
means. I was not physically inclined in those things. I passed the courses,
but, as I said, that usually was my B. (Laughs)

Nykolaiszyn

Did you spend much time in the old library?
11

Duncan

No, I can’t even visualize the old library.

Nykolaiszyn

Okay.

Duncan

I really can’t.

Nykolaiszyn

Okay, and were there any campus hangouts you gravitated towards?

Duncan

Not really. Probably the most well-known one at that time was Swims,
which was on the corner of Elm Street and Knoblock. I had known a lot of
the Swim family, and they had daughters who were about my age. There
wasn’t a lot of hanging out because not only did I go to major in accounting
and graduate in three years, but I worked most of the time when I was going
to school, as well.

Nykolaiszyn

Well, let’s talk about that.

Duncan

Well, I had worked even in high school. I remember (and it just seems
ludicrous, really) that I typed and corrected a man’s master’s thesis when I
was, I think, just a senior in high school, or it could have been when I was a
freshman in college. I worked for a time (this was when I was in high
school) for a man in the Agricultural Education Department, a man named
Don Orr and his colleague Chris White, so I had that experience. Then I did
that work for this man on his master’s. I don’t know why he would have
allowed me to do that, but, anyway, he graduated. He got his credit. Then I
worked in what turned out to be my brother-in-law’s accounting office,
which was in the BancFirst building downtown.

Nykolaiszyn

Okay, so after graduation what do you end up doing?

Duncan

I worked in the accounting office downtown for—well, I graduated in ’49,
and I worked there until October of 1954. When I graduated from college
and I was nineteen, I was not old enough to take the CPA examination
because you had to be twenty-one. I had gotten married, and I worked. We
didn’t have any children, and we adopted a baby girl in October of 1954,
and so I set up an office in my home. I had, of course, acquired some clients
individually, working after graduation from ’49 to ’54, so I had plenty of
work to do in my home office. I maintained my home office from October
1954, and here I am today. However, at that time, we lived on West Sixth
Street. It was in May of 1969 that we moved to this location, and this has
been my office ever since.

Nykolaiszyn

Well, fresh out of college, before taking the CPA exam, what was a typical
day like in the office?

12

Duncan

Well, you know, it depended on what you were working on. One of the
things that I did most of the time, there was an older woman who worked in
the office for my brother-in-law, whose principal client was the Stillwater
publishing company. She had strong ties to OSU because at one time her
daughter had married the son of the then-president of OSU, a man named
Knapp, K-N-A-P-P. There is a street in Stillwater today named Knapp.
Anyway, this woman’s name was Willa Dusch. It was D-U-S-C-H. She was
a long-time resident. She tutored me. She was my mentor on all the
accounting processes for the publishing company and for the radio station
KSPI. That became one of my main clients, but a lot of the work that I did at
first was what you would call write-up work. It was, you know, basically
bookkeeping for various businesses. Then I did individual and business tax
returns. Of course, tax season was busier. All of it was manual. There were
no computers, and your tax returns, we usually typed those or had people
who typed them and used carbon paper. All of it was manual.
It was eight to twelve, and one to five, and my husband was working in the
same office. My brother-in-law was the owner of the business, and another
man whose name was John Hunt who had graduated from Oklahoma A&M
as an accounting major, a very outstanding student, and one who had known
Wilton Anderson well, and who was then later head of the department, I
think after B. F. Harrison. There were good role models there. Then when I
left the office, I took all the work for Stillwater publishing company. I did
monthly financial statements for them, and I worked for them even clear up
through, I think it was 1997 that the Stillwater publishing company and the
radio station was sold to this community newspaper’s organization which
now owns and operates the…. At one time, they had set up a radio station in
Fort Collins, Colorado, the Poudre Valley Broadcasting Company. I did
work for them, and I had a lot of farm accounts with people with registered
cattle and dairies. In public accounting, you have lots of variation, and you
learn about all kinds of businesses. (Laughs) At that point, there was quite a
bit of oil play in Payne County, as there is today. I finally took the CPA
exam in the fall of 1958.

Nykolaiszyn

How did you prepare for it?

Duncan

Well, I just studied on my own. I remember this Dr. Vandegrift, he lived
fairly close to where we lived out on West Sixth. He and B. F. Harrison, too,
they were very skeptical that I would do very well. Well, I passed it all the
first time, which was unusual. Of course, today, it is taken in segments on
the computer, but then you sat and took it all in two or three days. I took the
exam at the state capitol in the legislative chambers, and I think I was the
only woman taking it. Anyway, I got my CPA certificate then issued in
February of 1959, and I know that that certificate was presented to me at
Southern Hills Country Club in Tulsa. If I remember correctly, Dr.
Vandegrift and B. F. Harrison and several went over there for that. (Laughs)
13

From there on, I got quite involved with the Oklahoma Society of CPAs
[OSCPA], and I did a lot of stuff.
Ultimately in accounting, I was appointed by the governor to the State
Board of Accountancy and served on that for five years, including being
Chairman of the State Board of Accountancy, so that was meetings in
Oklahoma City. There’s an organization called NASBA, the National
Association of State Boards of Accountancy. Each State Board of
Accountancy that regulates the practice of public accounting belongs to this
national organization. Well, ultimately I ended up serving as the national
treasurer for the National Association of State Boards of Accountancy.
Also, I was still active in the Oklahoma Society of CPAs and became
president of that organization, the first woman to be president of the
Oklahoma Society of CPAs. With that position then, I became a member of
the Board of Directors of the American Institute of CPAs. I served in that
position only one year, however. Then I did receive the Oklahoma
Accounting Hall of Fame Award one year, and the Oklahoma Public Service
Award one year, so I got very involved in the professional organizations.
Locally, Stillwater was part of what was called the North Central Chapter of
the OSCPA, and I served in all of the offices. I still am the CPE [continuing
professional education] coordinator for that chapter even today.
Nykolaiszyn

Oh, my goodness.

Duncan

I’ve had a really busy professional involvement in accountancy and have
sort of, maybe, broken the glass ceiling because I was the first woman chair
of the Oklahoma Accountancy Board and the first woman president of the
Oklahoma Society of CPAs. Of course, now there are more women
accountants than there are men, and there have been a number of other
presidents of the Oklahoma Society who are women. That’s where we are, I
think.

Nykolaiszyn

Well, with the accountancy board, which governor appointed you?

Duncan

Well, let me think. He was the one who had a little—was it Governor
[David] Hall, had a little bit of a…problem, gossip. Yeah, we’ll put it
gossip. (Laughter)

Nykolaiszyn

Well, looking back on your career in accounting, what has been some of the
more rewarding aspects for you?

Duncan

Well, I think it’s been the relationships with clients because they come to
depend upon you and it’s a very personal thing, just like it would be with a
doctor because you know, probably, more about their business than they

14

know. I’ve had people who are my clients call me to ask me all kinds of
questions.
Nykolaiszyn

And technology has been, has seen lots of changes.

Duncan

Oh, yes.

Nykolaiszyn

I mean, we started talking about punch cards when you were in college.
Can you just take me through some of the major technology that has
impacted your work through the years?

Duncan

Well, principally, the computer, and now you do very little manually as far
as write-up work. People do their own bookkeeping in-house by using
accounting software. If I do accounting work for somebody, I use software
instead of writing it in a journal and transferring it to a ledger, and then
making handwritten financial statements. All of that is computerized. I never
did really take any computer classes. I just learned on my own. I learned by
doing. I’m not as proficient in some elements as I should be, but I managed.

Nykolaiszyn

You mentioned Wilton Anderson a little while ago. Did you have any
interactions with him throughout the years?

Duncan

Very little, very little because I never did have any classes under Wilton
Anderson. I remember being in meetings where he was, but I did not have a
close relationship with him at all.

Nykolaiszyn

And have you had any interactions with students in your professional
career, in terms of mentoring?

Duncan

Yes, very many because since I’ve had an office in my home, I have hired
accounting students to help me. I have had some wonderful student
employees, yes, more than I can count, and some I can’t even really
remember (Laughter) because it’s been so long. One of the most recent
employees I’ve had went on to get her law degree and is now working in the
state attorney general’s office. I’ve had some excellent, excellent students
work for me. One young man who worked for me is now partner in
Stanfield and O’Dell firm, with principal offices in Tulsa and Springfield,
Missouri. I have another young man who has his own practice in the Dallas
Metro area. Yes, I would say I have mentored lots and lots of students.

Nykolaiszyn

And do you still try to keep up with what’s going on in the accounting world
and keep current?

Duncan

Well, I do, mainly because I have done this coordination of our North
Central Chapter CPE Program, and we get materials from Bisk Educational
Company, which is in Tampa, Florida. They’ve recently been bought out by
15

a legal publication company, Thomson Reuters. Every month I get this data.
I mean, we get printed material with quizzers, and then we get the DVDs. I
don’t have to do that, but I find it interesting. I go to the CPE every month.
We have it eleven times a [year]. We don’t have it in April because of the
tax deadline for people. It’s too pressing.
I might mention that one of the things that I have done outside of the
profession, (and you may be going to ask me about that) since 1985
Stillwater has had a sister-city relationship with Kameoka, Japan. That came
about because the State Department of Commerce had signed a sister-state
agreement with Kyoto Prefecture in Japan. They thought it would be a good
idea if there were some cities in Oklahoma who had relationships with other
cities in Kyoto Prefecture, so in 1985, Stillwater signed a sister-city
agreement with Kameoka, Japan.
I was one who volunteered to help with the organization of a council in
Stillwater, which is a part of the city government, to handle those things. I
actually wrote the bylaws. Of course, they had to be approved by everyone.
I’ve been very active, the only member of that council to have served
continuously, and I still serve on that. In that role, I had made two trips to
Japan as a representative of the City of Stillwater and have lots of Japanese
friends. Not necessarily as an outgrowth of that but prior to that, my
husband and I had started a program at church, teaching English to
international students on campus, and so we’ve done that for more than fifty
years, and I still do that.
Nykolaiszyn

Wonderful.

Duncan

I teach two classes every week, and sometimes in years past I’ve taught
more than that, to international students. We use the Bible, but we have an
emphasis of English with pronunciation and vocabulary and grammar. It’s
mainly conversational English. As a result of that, I’ve done quite a bit of
traveling to visit some students that we’ve had in our English classes. I’ve
had a lot of Chinese students, but I’ve never been to China. I’ve been to
Italy. I’ve been to Europe. I’ve been to South America.

Nykolaiszyn

Wow.

Duncan

We don’t travel at all now because my husband is, he will be ninety-four in
July. We don’t do the traveling like we did, but I’ve had a very busy life and
an enjoyable one. (Laughs)

Nykolaiszyn

And it’s not over yet…

Duncan

No.

16

Nykolaiszyn

…because you’re not retired, technically.

Duncan

No, I’m not. (Laughter) As a matter of fact, I am not as busy this week as I
was last week because in addition, through the church teaching these
internationals English classes, I have been involved with the University
Center of the Church of Christ. I am secretary of the University Center
administrative committee. Part of that obligation is because we have a
University Center Foundation which has a very large endowment, and it’s
growing. I do all the financial work for that, handle the investments for that
organization. We had a mid-year meeting last Saturday, so I was very busy
last week with all of those reports and getting ready for that meeting. We
need to make sure there’s some continuity here, some people to take over.
What our foundation does is it pays university students who work twenty
hours or so a week at the university center in outreach to other university
students. Our foundation has had, we paid six interns this past academic
year, and we subsidize other activities like a fall retreat for students, or a
spring retreat for students, or a women’s retreat, and those kind of things.

Nykolaiszyn

You mentioned your first child earlier in the interview.

Duncan

Yes.

Nykolaiszyn

Can you tell me a little something about your children?

Duncan

All right, our daughter now is an adult services librarian at the Stillwater
Public Library. She has two degrees from Oklahoma State University. Her
first degree is in Spanish. Her master’s degree is in TESOL, Teaching
English to Speakers of Other Languages, and most of her adult life she spent
in California teaching English to non-native speakers. Then she became
interested in libraries in California, and so she decided that she would get a
degree in library science, which is a master’s in library science. She went to
OU [University of Oklahoma] to get it because it wasn’t available here, so
she got that degree at OU. She went back to California and worked in
Antioch, California, which is in the East Bay area, but she didn’t like the
community at all, so she came back to Stillwater. She has taught two
different times at the English Language Institute at OSU, but she’s now fulltime at the public library as adult services librarian. She had, a short time,
taught at Texas Southmost College in Brownsville, Texas. She spent time in
Mexico, and she’s very fluent in Spanish. Of course, she has degree in
Spanish, but she had lived in Mexico for a short time and then by being right
on the Texas-Mexico border. She’s never married, but she lives here in
Stillwater.
Our son has taken over the accounting practice that originally belonged—
well, my brother-in-law had bought it out from a man who started the
business, and I think he was a graduate of Oklahoma A&M. His name was
17

Cassie Bingham. The brother-in-law had bought that business in 1941. Now
since, I’m not in that office; brother-in-law is dead; Mr. Hunt is dead. Our
son and another man, Ed Onley, who is a graduate in accounting at OSU,
they have Duncan & Onley Professional Corporation, which is in BancFirst
building. He lives here in Stillwater, and he has two sons who are both
graduates of OSU. The older grandson of ours is a CPA, and he works for
Bank of Oklahoma in the metro location in Oklahoma City. He has done
very, very well. He is in the area of commercial loans for medical facilities,
for very large nursing homes, hospitals, those kinds of things. He married a
girl who is an OSU graduate from Elk City. Her name is Mica Edwards, and
the grandson’s name is Robert Duncan. They live in Edmond, and they have
three children.
So we have three great-grandchildren. Then our son has a younger boy who
is seven years younger than Robert, and his name is David. He graduated
from OSU with a degree in graphic arts, and for a while he worked in Tulsa
with This Land Press, which I know Donna knows about. When I say
Donna, I mean Donna Wilson, knows about This Land Press. Last winter, I
think it was in December, he changed jobs to work with a company which
actually has their corporate headquarters in Stillwater. It’s called Interworks,
and it was begun by Stillwater High School graduates. Their headquarters
office is out on Sangre [Road], across from Meridian Technology. Anyway,
they have their headquarters here, but they have an office in the Oklahoma
City area and in Tulsa, and David is with them in Tulsa. He likes it very
much, and he does quite a bit of freelance graphic artwork, as well.
Nykolaiszyn

I’m hoping as we wind everything down if you could go through old
Stillwater downtown for me…

Duncan

Oh, all right.

Nykolaiszyn

…and tell me…

Duncan

Well, maybe.

Nykolaiszyn

…what was there and…

Duncan

Okay.

Nykolaiszyn

…what used to be there, I mean, because I don’t come across people who
have such good detail of old Stillwater. If we could get some of this…

Duncan

Now, I may not have a complete memory. (Laughs)

Nykolaiszyn

…or even just some…

18

Duncan

Where do you want me to start?

Nykolaiszyn

…some downtown highlights.

Duncan

Let’s start sort of at the north end where the furniture store is at Main at
Fifth. That used to be Leachman Theatre, and the Leachman family owned
several theaters in Stillwater. There was one, well, there was the Leachman
Theatre which was the newest of the theaters. Then there was one in the,
probably the second location, north of Seventh Street and Main, where now
Russ Teubner owns that building. I think in there is the offices of Stillwater
Medical Center. In that area there used to be an Aggie Theater, and that was
owned by the Leachmans. Then in the block south on the west side, about
where Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory is, somewhere in there, there was
another theater that the Leachman family owned that was called the Mecca
Theater. Then up on campus corner where Hideaway is, right on the corner,
was Campus Theater. At one time, I think the Leachman family owned all of
those theaters.
Okay, going back to the area of Sixth and Main where Stillwater National
Bank is, it was not the bank location. It was a hotel. That was one thing you
asked, about a typical date. There was a hotel, and then south of there was a
restaurant called Smith’s Café. I did work for the Smith’s Café a long time,
but in this hotel we would—the church was right directly back of it, west of
it across the alleyway. We would go down to that hotel, and we had some
activities there. I think there was maybe a drugstore next door. Anyway,
there was a place you could get drinks and ice cream and those kind of
things.
Let me see. There used to be in that block just south of there, B&C Office
Supply. Now, they’re now down on Ninth Street. Then as you move on
down that block, there was a men’s store on the west side. I should be able
to think of because my husband probably still has some clothing that has
their label on, (Laughs) McBride’s maybe. Then on the corner where they
have just recently remodeled that building, (and I think Russ Teubner is the
one who bought that building and remodeled it) that was a drugstore. Across
the street, there was a drugstore, and one of those was Van Horn’s
Drugstore. I should remember the names of those other drugstores, but…

Nykolaiszyn

Quite a few.

Duncan

Oh, there were. If I really sat down to think about it, I could come up with
the names. The west side of that block between Sixth and Seventh there was
that hotel, there was B&C Office Supply, and a men’s clothing store, and
then that drugstore. Now, on the other side, right on the corner of Sixth and
Main, used to be the Thomas Ford Agency, and the man who operated it,
most of my memory, was Bill Thomas, who at one time was mayor of
19

Stillwater. Then the American Legion hall is upstairs, and they had
downstairs things. They own that building where there’s a barber shop in
there now, and I was trying to think what else had been in there earlier. Then
that Aggie Theater was there. On the corner of Seventh and Main way back
when, when we first came to Stillwater, (this would have been 1936 or ʼ7)
there was a grocery store there, Searcy’s Grocery. Then in later years, like
when I was in high school, there was a music store there operated by—
Chenoweth and Green was the name of it, I believe.
Then if you go across the street south where now is that Brooklyn’s
Restaurant, that for years was Katz Department Store. Then in that block,
there used to be, way back when, a Woolworth Store. Clear on down to the
corner, there used to be a TG&Y, which was a five-and-dime store on the
corner. Across the street, there was that Van Horn’s; back to Seventh and
Main, there was Van Horn’s Drug. In more recent years, Bates Brother’s
Clothing. I’m not sure in there where those jewelry store and things, what
they might have been way back when. Might have been—there was a
Washinka Jewelry Store, and then there was a ladies clothing store. In more
recent years, it was called the Clothes Closet and was run by people by the
name of Irby.
This has been in more recent years, too, there was this company called
Cottontails that had a location, and they not only had that retail location, but
clear out north on, well, probably Lakeview, north of Boomer Lake, a
warehouse. They manufactured children’s clothing. Then Central Drug on
the corner. That’s pretty well been—Central Drug used to be right on the
corner. Central Drug is second from the corner, but it used to be. Let’s see
what else we’ve got. (Laughs) Moving on south, the building that housed,
well, it was First National Bank at that time, was demolished, and the bank
that’s there now, BancFirst, was built to the south. I’m not sure whether
BancFirst really owns the land. I know originally the people [who] owned
that gave BancFirst a ninety-nine year lease…
Nykolaiszyn

Wow.

Duncan

…rather than selling it to them because I was involved in that transaction.
Then, next to the bank was what was known as a Rexall Drug Store, and I’m
not sure what. There were law offices then in that middle of that block
between Eighth and Ninth on the west side. There were law offices of Clee
Fitzgerald, Don Worthington. Some of the Worthington people are still here.
Oh, Winfrey Houston, who is now retired, later was in business with Lynn
Osborn. They had law offices in there. Then on the corner, way back, was a
grocery store called Cooksey’s. Then later it became a restaurant, and the
woman that had that restaurant was known as Ma Montgomery. (Laughs)
That’s what everybody called her, was Ma Montgomery. Anyway, it was a
very good place to eat. That was what was on the corner.
20

And let’s see. Across the street where that—is it called First Main Place,
where that computer place is now? You can walk through there, L-shaped,
and there are business offices. Kent Houck owns that property now. That
used to be the location of Stillwater National Bank, and it relocated to the
corner of Sixth and Main on the west side. That used to be the Stillwater
National Bank. Then south of there, I don’t know. Murphy’s has always
been pretty much where Murphy’s is. I may be a little blank on what was in
between. (Laughs) I could probably scrape it up in my memory somewhere.
Nykolaiszyn

Not too bad for being put on the spot. (Laughter)

Duncan

No, I wasn’t prepared for this! There used to be the car agency, Ward Buick,
which was back of that where, well, on Ninth and Main, where it used to be
Cooksey’s on the corner, where that mural is on the side of the building. Just
west of there used to be this Ward Buick car agency, and the Chevrolet
agency was back of that First Main Place, back of the Stillwater National
Bank on the east side, which would have been Eighth and Lewis Street,
across from the Post Office. The Post Office used to be where now the OSU
Art Gallery is. That was the Post Office. Now it’s on Lewis Street.
I may be a little blank to tell you everything in between Ninth and Tenth.
There’s a building down there that is the Mullendore building. Mullendores
used to have, I think it was more of what you’d call a department store, dry
goods, clothing, and that kind of thing. Then at one time that building, (and
this was when I was in high school) it was used for what they called Teen
Town, and I know I was involved with that. It was a place for young people
to meet, and they had activities and dances and all kinds of things to keep
kids off the street. That was in that Mullendore building. My involvement
with that is what led to my connection with Don Orr, who was an
agricultural education professor.
I ended up working for him because I had gotten acquainted with him. He
was one of the adults involved with that, as well as one of the Bellatti
family, that own Stillwater [NewsPress]. The youngest of three sons, James
Bellatti, was more nearly my age, and I know we were both officers of the
group that were involved with that. I remember working with him on that,
and then of course I had a lot of connection with James Bellatti all through
the years. He still is alive and lives here in Stillwater because he is, you
know, one of the owners of the Stillwater [NewsPress] and the radio station.
I think I’ll have to—some of those other businesses down farther south, I’m
sort of blank on what…

Nykolaiszyn

They’ll come to mind about seven o’clock tonight.

21

Duncan

Right, I can probably fill you in. (Laughter) I do know that the Stillwater
Public Library has done quite a bit of research and probably could identify
every location for you with what’s there now, what had been there
previously, and prior to that. I know that they’ve done research on that
because I even think my daughter had translated the English version into
Spanish or something. I know she had done some work on that. If you need
more information, I’m sure it’s available.

Nykolaiszyn

Well, looking back on your career and your accomplishments and your
family, how would you like to be remembered?

Duncan

Probably as a Christian, as a follower of Christ, and doing the best I could
with anything I did.

Nykolaiszyn

And you’ve been in Oklahoma your entire life. What does Oklahoma mean
to you?

Duncan

Well, there’s one state that has the motto “The Land of Opportunity,” and
there have been lots of opportunities.

Nykolaiszyn

And is there anything you would like to say about anybody who’s made, you
know, just an important impact on your life as we get ready to close out
today?

Duncan

Well, there have been so many people that—certainly, I often think of a
woman, (this would be through church connections) her name was Velma
Fagan. She inspired me a lot, and I think I owe a lot to her. My mother, and
probably my brothers, both of them. There’s just countless numbers of
people.

Nykolaiszyn

And is there anything you’d like to add before we close on out, anything I’ve
mentioned, I failed to mention, I failed to ask?

Duncan

Well, I don’t know. (Laughter) I don’t know. I probably told you too much.
I had jotted down I was inducted into Phi Kappa Phi during my university
career, even though it was short. I did not belong to a lot of campus
organizations at all. I mean, I did through our church group of young people.
Was busy with that and with working, and then with Mortar Board during
my senior year. I think we pretty well covered things.

Nykolaiszyn

Well, Sylvia, thank you so much for joining us today. It’s been a pleasure.
------- End of interview -------

22

